    Safe Pareto Improvements for Delegated Game
                      Playing∗
                 Caspar Oesterheld† and Vincent Conitzer

                     Foundations of Cooperative AI Lab
                       Computer Science Department
                        Carnegie Mellon University

                                        2022



                                     Abstract
          A set of players delegate playing a game to a set of representatives,
      one for each player. We imagine that each player trusts their respec-
      tive representative’s strategic abilities. Thus, we might imagine that
      per default, the original players would simply instruct the represen-
      tatives to play the original game as best as they can. In this paper,
      we ask: are there safe Pareto improvements on this default way of
      giving instructions? That is, we imagine that the original players can
      coordinate to tell their representatives to only consider some subset of
      the available strategies and to assign utilities to outcomes differently
      than the original players. Then can the original players do this in such
      a way that the payoff is guaranteed to be weakly higher than under
      the default instructions for all the original players? In particular, can
      they Pareto-improve without probabilistic assumptions about how the
      representatives play games? In this paper, we give some examples of
      safe Pareto improvements. We prove that the notion of safe Pareto
      improvements is closely related to a notion of outcome correspondence
      between games. We also show that under some specific assumptions
      about how the representatives play games, finding safe Pareto improve-
      ments is NP-complete.
   ∗
     This paper was published in JAAMAS vol. 36, doi: 10.1007/s10458-022-09574-6.
Please cite the JAAMAS version. The present version is equal to the JAAMAS ver-
sion, except for formatting. A shorter version of this paper has been published in the
Proceedings of AAMAS 2021.
   †
     Corresponding author: oesterheld@cmu.edu


                                          1
                                           Player 2
                                 DM       RM      DL       RL
                          DM    −3, −3     2, 0  5, −5    5, −5
                          RM     0, 2      1, 1  5, −5    5, −5
              Player 1
                          DL     −5, 5    −5, 5   1, 1     2, 0
                          RL     −5, 5    −5, 5   0, 2     1, 1


                         Table 1: The Demand Game

1    Introduction
Between Aliceland and Bobbesia lies a sparsely populated desert. Until
recently, neither of the two countries had any interest in the desert. How-
ever, geologists have recently discovered that it contains large oil reserves.
Now, both Aliceland and Bobbesia would like to annex the desert, but they
worry about a military conflict that would ensue if both countries insist on
annexing.
    Table 1 models this strategic situation as a normal-form game. The
strategy DM (short for “Demand with Military”) denotes a military invasion
of the desert, demanding annexation. If both countries send their military
with such an aggressive mission, the countries fight a devastating war. The
strategy RM (for “Refrain with Military”) denotes yielding the territory
to the other country, but building defenses to prevent an invasion of one’s
current territories. Alternatively, the countries can choose to not raise a
military force at all, while potentially still demanding control of the desert
by sending only its leader (DL, short for “Demand with Leader”). In this
case, if both countries demand the desert, war does not ensue. Finally,
they could neither demand nor build up a military (RL). If one of the two
countries has their military ready and the other does not, the militarized
country will know and will be able to invade the other country. In game-
theoretic terms, militarizing therefore strictly dominates not militarizing.
    Instead of making the decision directly, the parliaments of Aliceland and
Bobbesia appoint special commissions for making this strategic decision,
led by Alice and Bob, respectively. The parliaments can instruct these
representatives in various ways. They can explicitly tell them what to do
– for example, Aliceland could directly tell Alice to play DM. However, we
imagine that the parliaments trust the commissions’ judgments more than
they trust their own and hence they might prefer to give an instruction


                                      2
of the type, “make whatever demands you think are best for our country”
(perhaps contractually guaranteeing a reward in proportion to the utility of
the final outcome). They might not know what that will entail, i.e., how the
commissions decide what demands to make given that instruction. However
– based on their trust in their representatives – they might still believe that
this leads to better outcomes than giving an explicit instruction.
    We will also imagine these instructions are (or at least can be) given
publicly and that the commissions are bound (as if by a contract) to follow
these instructions. In particular, we imagine that the two commissions can
see each other’s instructions. Thus, in instructing their commissions, the
countries play a game with bilateral precommitment. When instructed to
play a game as best as they can, we imagine that the commissions play that
game in the usual way, i.e., without further abilities to credibly commit or
to instruct subcommittees and so forth.
    It may seem that without having their parliaments ponder equilibrium
selection, Aliceland and Bobbesia cannot do better than leave the game to
their representatives. Unfortunately, in this default equilibrium, war is still
a possibility. Even the brilliant strategists Alice and Bob may not always be
able to resolve the difficult equilibrium selection problem to the same pure
Nash equilibrium.
    In the literature on commitment devices and in particular the literature
on program equilibrium, important ideas have been proposed for avoiding
such bad outcomes. Imagine for a moment that Alice and Bob will play a
Prisoner’s Dilemma (Table 3) (rather than the Demand Game of Table 1).
Then the default of (Defect, Defect) can be Pareto-improved upon. Both
original players (Aliceland and Bobbesia) can use the following instruction
for their representatives: “If the opponent’s instruction is equal to this in-
struction, Cooperate; otherwise Defect.” [33, 22, 46, Sect. 10.4, 55] Then
it is a Nash equilibrium for both players to use this instruction. In this
equilibrium, (Cooperate, Cooperate) is played and it is thus Pareto-optimal
and Pareto-better than the default.
    In cases like the Demand Game, it is more difficult to apply this ap-
proach to improve upon the default of simply delegating the choice. Of
course, if one could calculate the expected utility of submitting the default
instructions, then one could similarly commit the representatives to follow
some (joint) mix over the Pareto-optimal outcomes ((RM, DM), (DM, RM),
(RM, RM), (DL, DL), etc.) that Pareto-improves on the default expected
utilities.1 However, we will assume that the original players are unable or
  1
      One might argue that due to the symmetry of the Demand Game, the original players



                                           3
                                                  Player 2’s rep.
                                                  DL         RL
                                         DL      −3, −3      2, 0
                     Player 1’s rep.
                                         RL       0, 2       1, 1


         Table 2: A safe Pareto improvement for the Demand Game


unwilling to form probabilistic expectations about how the representatives
play the Demand Game, i.e., about what would happen with the default
instructions. If this is the case, then this type of Pareto improvement on
the default is unappealing.
    The goal of this paper is to show and analyze how even without form-
ing probabilistic beliefs about the representatives, the original players can
Pareto-improve on the default equilibrium. We will call such improvements
safe Pareto improvements (SPIs). We here briefly give an example in the
Demand Game.
    The key idea is for the original players to instruct the representatives to
select only from {DL, RL}, i.e., to not raise a military. Further, they tell
them to disvalue the conflict outcome without military (DL, DL) as they
would disvalue the original conflict outcome of war in the default equilib-
rium. Overall, this means telling them to play the game of Table 2. (Again,
we could imagine that the instructions specify Table 2 to be how Aliceland
and Bobbesia financially reward Alice and Bob.) Importantly, Aliceland’s
instruction to play that game must be conditional on Bobbesia also instruct-
ing their commission to play that game, and vice versa. Otherwise, one of
the countries could profit from deviating by instructing their representative
to always play DM or RM (or to play by the original utility function).
    The game of Table 2 is isomorphic to the DM-RM part of the original
Demand Game of Table 1. Of course, the original players know neither
how the original Demand Game nor the game of Table 2 will be played by
the representatives. However, since these games are isomorphic, one should
arguably expect them to be played isomorphically. For example, one should
expect that (RM, DM) would be played in the original game if and only
should expect the representatives to play the game’s unique symmetric equilibrium (in
which both players play DM with probability 1/4 and RM with probability 3/4). Of course,
in general games might be asymmetric. We here consider a symmetric game only for
simplicity. More generally, some games with multiple equilibria might have a single “focal”
equilibrium [48, pp. 54–58] that we expect the representatives to play. However, we
maintain that in many games it is not clear what equilibrium should be played.


                                            4
if (RL, DL) would be played in the modified game. However, the conflict
outcome (DM, DM) is replaced in the new game with the outcome (DL, DL).
This outcome is harmless (Pareto-optimal) for the original players.

Contributions Our paper generalizes this idea to arbitrary normal-form
games and is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce some nota-
tion for games and multivalued functions that we will use throughout this
paper. In Section 3, we introduce the setting of delegated game playing for
this paper. We then formally define and further motivate the concept of
safe Pareto improvements. We also define and give an example of unilateral
SPIs. These are SPIs that require only one of the players to commit their
representative to a new action set and utility function. In Section 3.2, we
briefly review the concepts of program games and program equilibrium and
show that SPIs can be implemented as program equilibria. In Section 4.2,
we introduce a notion of outcome correspondence between games. This re-
lation expresses the original players’ beliefs about similarities between how
the representatives play different games. In our example, the Demand Game
of Table 1 (arguably) corresponds to the game of Table 2 in that the repre-
sentatives (arguably) would play (DM, DM) in the original game if and only
if they play (DL, DL) in the new game, and so forth. We also show some ba-
sic results (reflexivity, transitivity, etc.) about the outcome correspondence
relation on games. In Section 4.3 we show that the notion of outcome cor-
respondence is central to deriving SPIs. In particular, we show that a game
Γs is an SPI on another game Γ if and only if there is a Pareto-improving
outcome correspondence relation between Γs and Γ.
     To derive SPIs, we need to make some assumptions about outcome cor-
respondence, i.e., about which games are played in similar ways by repre-
sentatives. We give two very weak assumptions of this type in Section 4.4.
The first is that the representatives’ play is invariant under the removal of
strictly dominated strategies. For example, we assume that in the Demand
Game the representatives only play DM and RM. Moreover we assume that
we could remove DL and RL from the game and the representatives would
still play the same strategies as in the original Demand Game with certainty.
The second assumption is that the representatives play isomorphic games
isomorphically. For example, once DL and RL are removed for both players
from the Demand Game, the Demand Game is isomorphic to the game in
Table 2 such that we might expect them to be played isomorphically. In
Section 4.5, we derive a few SPIs – including our SPI for the Demand Game
– using these assumptions. Section 4.6 shows that determining whether


                                      5
there exists an SPI based on these assumptions is NP-complete. Section 5
considers a different setting in which we allow the original players to let the
representatives choose from newly constructed strategies whose correspond-
ing outcomes map arbitrarily onto feasible payoff vectors from the original
game. In this new setting, finding SPIs can be done in polynomial time. We
conclude by discussing the problem of selecting between different SPIs on a
given game (Section 6) and giving some ideas for directions for future work
(Section 7).


2    Preliminaries
We here give some basic game-theoretic definitions. We assume the reader
to be familiar with most of these concepts and with game theory more
generally.
     An n-player (normal-form) game is a tuple (A, u) of a set A = A1 × ... ×
An of (pure) strategy profiles (or outcomes) and a function u : A → Rn that
assigns to each outcome a utility for each player. The Prisoner’s Dilemma
shown in Table 3 is a classic example of a game. The Demand Game of
Table 1 is another example of a game that we will use throughout this
paper.
     Instead of (A, u) we will also write (A1 , ..., An , u1 , ..., un ). We also write
A−i for ×j̸=i Ai , i.e., for the Cartesian product of the action sets of all players
other than i. We similarly write u−i and a−i for vectors containing utility
functions and actions, respectively, for all players but i. If ui is a utility
function and u−i is a vector of utility functions for all players other than i,
then (even if i ̸= 1) we use (ui , u−i ) for the full vector of utility functions
where Player i has utility function ui and the other players have utility
functions as specified by u−i . We use (Ai , A−i ) and (ai , a−i ) analogously.
     We say that ai ∈ Ai strictly dominates a′i ∈ Ai if for all a−i ∈ A−i ,
ui (ai , a−i ) > ui (a′i , a−i ). For example, in the Prisoner’s Dilemma, Defect
strictly dominates Cooperate for both players. As noted earlier, DM and
RM strictly dominate DL and RL for both players.
     For any given game Γ = (A, u), we will call any game Γ′ = (A′ , u′ ) a
subset game of Γ if A′i ⊆ Ai for i = 1, ..., n. Note that a subset game may
assign different utilities to outcomes than the original game. For example,
the game of Table 2 is a subset game of the Demand Game.
     We say that some utility vector y ∈ Rn is a Pareto improvement on
(or is Pareto-better than) y′ ∈ Rn if yi ≥ yi′ for i = 1, ..., n. We will also
denote this by y ≥ y′ . Note that, contrary to convention, we allow y = y′ .


                                          6
                                                     Player 2
                                             Cooperate       Defect
                          Cooperate             3, 3          1, 4
             Player 1
                           Defect               4, 1          2, 2


                        Table 3: The Prisoner’s Dilemma

Whenever we require one of the inequalities to be strict, we will say that y is
a strict Pareto improvement on y′ . In a given game, we will also say that an
outcome a is a Pareto improvement on another outcome a′ if u(a) ≥ u(a′ ).
We say that y is Pareto-optimal or Pareto-efficient relative to some S ⊂ Rn
if there is no element of S that strictly Pareto-dominates y.
    Let Γ = (A, u) and Γ′ = (A′ , u′ ) be two n-player games. Then we call
an n-tuple of functions Φ = (Φi : Ai → A′i )i=1,...,n a (game) isomorphism
between Γ and Γ′ if there are vectors λ ∈ Rn+ and c ∈ Rn such that

                 ui (a1 , ..., an ) = λi u′i (Φ1 (a1 ), ..., Φn (an )) + ci

for all a ∈ A and i = 1, ..., n. If there is an isomorphism between Γ and
Γ′ , we call Γ and Γ′ isomorphic. For example, if we let Γ be the Demand
Game and Γs the subset game of Table 2, then ({DM, RM}, {DM, RM}, u) is
isomorphic to Γs via the isomorphism Φ with Φi (DM) = DL and Φi (RM) =
RL and the constants λ = (1, 1) and c = (0, 0).


3    Delegation and safe Pareto improvements
We consider a setting in which a given game Γ is played through what we
will call representatives. For example, the representatives could be humans
whose behavior is determined or incentivized by some contract à la the
principal–agent literature [28]. Our principals’ motivation for delegation is
the same as in that literature (namely, the agent being in a better (epistemic)
position to make the choice). However, the main question asked by the
principal–agent literature is how to deal with agents that have their own
preferences over outcomes, by constraining the agent’s choice [e.g. 21, 25],
setting up appropriate payment schemes [e.g. 23, 29, 37, 53], etc. In contrast,
we will throughout this paper assume that the agent has no conflicting
incentives.
    We imagine that one way in which the representatives can be instructed is
to in turn play a subset game Γs = (As1 ⊆ A1 , ..., Asn ⊆ An , us ) of the original

                                             7
game, without necessarily specifying a strategy or algorithm for solving such
a game. We emphasize, again, that us is allowed to be a vector of entirely
different utility functions. For any subset game Γs , we denote by Π(Γs )
the outcome that arises if the representatives play the subset game Γs of Γ.
Because it is unclear what the right choice is in many games, the original
players might be uncertain about Π(Γs ). We will therefore model each Π(Γs )
as a random variable. We will typically imagine that the representatives play
Γ in the usual simultaneous way, i.e., that they are not able to make further
commitments or delegate again. For example, we imagine that if Γ is the
Prisoner’s Dilemma, then Π(Γ) = (Defect, Defect) with certainty.
    The original players trust their representatives to the extent that we
take Π(Γ) to be a default way for the game to played for any Γ. That is,
by default the original players tell their representatives to play the game as
given. For example, in the Demand Game, it is not clear what the right
action is. Thus, if one can simply delegate the decision to someone with
more relevant expertise, that is the first option one would consider.
    We are interested in whether and how the original players can jointly
Pareto-improve on the default. Of course, one option is to first compute the
expected utilities under default delegation, i.e., to compute E [u(Π(Γ))]. The
players could then let the representatives play a distribution over outcomes
whose expected utilities exceed the default expected utilities. However, this
is unrealistic if Γ is a complex game with potentially many Nash equilibria.
For one, the precise point of delegation is that the original players are un-
able or unwilling to properly evaluate Γ. Second, there is no widely agreed
upon, universal procedure for selecting an action in the face of equilibrium
selection problems. In such cases, the original players may in practice be
unable to form a probability distribution over Π(Γ). This type of uncer-
tainty is sometimes referred to as Knightian uncertainty, following Knight’s
[26] distinction between the concepts of risk and uncertainty.
    We address this problem in a typical way. Essentially, we require of
any attempted improvement over the default that it incurs no regret in the
worst-case. That is, we are interested in subset games Γs that are Pareto
improvements with certainty under weak and purely qualitative assumptions
about Π.2 In particular, in Section 4.4, we will introduce the assumptions
   2
    Here is another way of putting this. When one of the players i deliberates whether
she would rather have the representatives play Π(Γ) or Π(Γs ), we could imagine that the
agent has a number of possible of models of how the representatives (Π) operate. Absent a
probability distribution over models, the only widely accepted circumstance under which
she can make such comparisons is decision-theoretic dominance [43, Sect. 3.1]: she should
prefer Π(Γs ) if ui (Π(Γs )) ≥ ui (Π(Γ)) under all models and ui (Π(Γs )) > ui (Π(Γ)) under



                                            8
that the representatives do not play strictly dominated actions and play
isomorphic games isomorphically.

Definition 1. Let Γs be a subset game of Γ. We say Γs is a safe Pareto
improvement (SPI) on Γ if u(Π(Γs )) ≥ u(Π(Γ)) with certainty. We say
that Γs is a strict SPI if furthermore, there is a player i s.t. ui (Π(Γs )) >
ui (Π(Γs )) with positive probability.

    For example, in the introduction we have argued that the subset game
in Table 2 is a strict SPI on the Demand Game (Table 1). Less interestingly,
if we let Γ = (A, u) be the Prisoner’s Dilemma (Table 3), then we would
expect ({Cooperate}, {Cooperate}, u) to be an SPI on Γ. After all, we
might expect that Π(Γ) = (Defect, Defect) with certainty, while it must be
Π({Cooperate}, {Cooperate}, u) = (Cooperate, Cooperate) with certainty,
for lack of alternatives. Both players prefer mutual cooperation over mutual
defection.

3.1    Unilateral safe Pareto Improvements
Both SPIs given above require both players to let their representatives choose
from restricted strategy sets to maximize something other than the original
player’s utility function.

Definition 2. We will call a subset game Γs = (As , us ) of Γ = (A, u)
unilateral if for all but one i ∈ {1, ..., n} it holds that Asi = Ai and usi = ui .
Consequently, if a unilateral subset game Γs of Γ is also an SPI for Γ, we
call Γs a unilateral SPI.

    We now give an example of a unilateral SPI using the Complicated Temp-
tation Game. (We give the not-so-complicated Temptation Game – in which
we can only give a trivial example of SPIs – in Section 4.5.) Two players
each deploy a robot. Each of the robots faces two choices in parallel. First,
each can choose whether to work on Project 1 or Project 2. Player 1 values
Project 1 higher and Player 2 values Project 2 higher, but the robots are
more effective if they work on the same project. To complete the task, the
two robots need to share a resource. Robot 2 manages the resource and
can choose whether to control Robot 1’s access tightly (e.g., by frequently
checking on the resource, or requiring Robot 1 to demonstrate a need for the
resource) or give Robot 1 relatively free access. Controlling access tightly
decreases the efficiency of both robots, though the exact costs depend on
at least some model of Π.


                                        9
which projects the robots are working on. Robot 1 can choose between using
the resource as intended by Robot 2; or give in to the temptation of trying
to steal as much of the resource as possible to use it for other purposes. Re-
gardless of what Robot 2 does (in particular, regardless of whether Robot
2 controls access or not), Player 1 prefers trying to steal. In fact, if Robot
2 controls access and Robot 1 refrains from theft, they never get anything
done. Given that Robot 1 tries to steal, Player 2 prefers his Robot 2 to
control access. As usual we assume that the original players can instruct
their robots to play arbitrary subset games of Γ (without specifying an al-
gorithm for solving such a game) and that they can give such instructions
conditional on the other player providing an analogous instruction.
     We formalize this game as a normal-form game in Table 4. Each action
consists of a number and letter. The number indicates the project that the
agent pursues. The letters indicates the agent’s policy towards the resource.
In Player 2’s action labels, C indicates tight control over the resource, while
F indicates free access. In Player 1’s action labels, T indicates giving in to
the temptation to steal as much of the resource as possible, while R indicates
refraining from doing so.
     Player 1 has a unilateral SPI in the Complicated Temptation Game.
Intuitively, if Player 1 commits to refrain, then Player 2 need not control
the use of the resource. Thus, inefficiencies from conflict over the resource
are avoided. However, Player 1’s utilities in the resulting game of choosing
between projects 1 and 2 are not isomorphic to the original game of choosing
between projects 1 and 2. The players might therefore worry that this new
game will result in a worse outcome for them. For example, Player 2 might
worry that in this new game the project 1 equilibrium (T1 , F1 ) becomes more
likely than the project 2 equilibrium. To address this, Player has to commit
her representative to a different utility function that makes this new game
isomorphic to the original game.
     We now describe the unilateral SPI in formal detail. Player 1 can com-
mit her representative to play only from R1 and R2 and to assign utilities
us1 (R1 , F1 ) = u1 (T1 , C1 ) = 4, us1 (R1 , F2 ) = u1 (T1 , C2 ) = 1, us1 (R2 , F1 ) =
u1 (T2 , C1 ) = 1, and us1 (R2 , F2 ) = u1 (T2 , C2 ) = 2; otherwise us1 does not
differ from u1 . The resulting SPI is given in Table 5. In this subset game,
Player 2’s representative – knowing that Player 1’s representative will only
play from R1 and R2 – will choose from F1 and F2 (since F1 and F2 strictly
dominate C1 and C2 in Table 5). Now notice that the remaining subset
game is isomorphic to the ({T1 , T2 }, {C1 , C2 }) subset game of the original
Complicated Temptation Game, where T1 maps to R1 and T2 maps to R2
for both Player 1, and C1 maps to F1 and C2 maps to F2 for Player 2. Player

                                          10
                                               Player 2
                        C1              C2                F1           F2
             T1         4, 2            1, 1              6, 0         6, 0
             T2         1, 1            2, 4              6, 0         6, 0
  Player 1
             R1         0, 0            0, 0              5, 3         3, 2
             R2         0, 0            0, 0              2, 2         3, 5


                  Table 4: Complicated Temptation Game

                                               Player 2
                        C1              C2                F1           F2
             R1         0, 0            0, 0              4, 3         1, 2
  Player 1
             R2         0, 0            0, 0              1, 2         2, 5


Table 5: Safe Pareto improvement for the Complicated Temptation Game


1’s representative’s utilities have been set to be the same between the two;
and Player 2’s utilities happen to be the same up to a constant (1) between
the two subset games. Thus, we might expect that if Π(Γ) = (T1 , C1 ), then
Π(Γs ) = (R1 , F1 ), and so on. Finally, notice that u(R1 , F1 ) ≥ u(T1 , C1 ) and
so on. Hence, Table 5 is indeed an SPI on the Complicated Temptation
Game.
     Such unilateral changes are particularly interesting because they only
require one of the players to be able to credibly delegate. That is, it is
enough for a single player to instruct their representative to choose from a
restricted action set to maximize a new utility function. The other players
can simply instruct their representatives to play the game in the normal way
(i.e., maximizing the respective players’ original utility functions without
restrictions on the action set). In fact, we may also imagine that only one
player i delegates at all, while the other players choose an action themselves,
after observing Player i’s instruction to her representative.
     One may object that in a situation where only one player can credibly
commit and the others cannot, the player who commits can simply play
the meta game as a standard unilateral commitment (Stackelberg) game
[as studied by, e.g., 11, 52, 59] or perhaps as a first mover in a sequential
game (as solved by subgame-perfect equilibrium), without bothering with
any (safe) Pareto conditions, i.e., without ensuring that all players are guar-


                                       11
anteed a utility at least as high as their default u(Π(Γ)). For example, in
the Complicated Temptation Game, Player 1 could simply commit her rep-
resentative to play R1 if she assumes that Player 2’s representative will be
instructed to best respond.
    The Stackelberg sequential play perspective is appropriate in many cases.
However, we think that in many cases the player with fine-grained commit-
ment ability cannot assume that the other players’ representatives will sim-
ply best respond. Instead, players often need to consider the possibility of
a hostile response if their commitment forces an unfair payoff on the other
players. In such cases, unilateral SPIs are relevant.
    The Ultimatum game is a canonical example in which standard solution
concepts of sequential play fail to predict human behavior. In this game,
subgame-perfect equilibrium has the second-moving player walk away with
arbitrarily close to nothing. However, experiments show that people often
resolve the game to an equal split, which is the symmetric equilibrium of
the simultaneous version of the game [38].
    A policy of retaliating for unfair payoffs imposed by a first mover’s com-
mitments can arise in a variety of ways within standard game-theoretic mod-
els. For one, we may imagine a scenario in which only one Player has the
fine-grained commitment and delegation abilities needed for SPIs but that
the other players can still credibly commit their representatives to retaliate
against any “commitment trickery” that clearly leaves them worse off. We
may also imagine that other players or representatives come into the scenario
having already made such commitments. For example, many people appear
credibly committed by intuitions about fairness and retributivist instincts
and emotions [see, e.g., 44, Chapter 6, especially the section “The Doomsday
Machine”]. Perhaps these features of human psychology allow human sec-
ond players in the Ultimatum game empirically outperform subgame-perfect
equilibrium. Second, we may imagine that the players who cannot commit
are subject to reputation effects. Then they might want to build a reputa-
tion of resisting coercion. In contrast, it is beneficial to have a reputation
of accepting SPIs on whatever game would have otherwise been played.

3.2   Implementing safe Pareto improvements as program equi-
      libria
So far, we have been vague about the details of the strategic situation that
the original players face in instructing their representatives. From what
sets of actions can they choose? How can they jointly let the representatives
play some new subset game Γs ? Are SPIs Nash equilibria of the meta game


                                     12
                    Player 1                     Player 2


                  Instruction 1                Instruction 2


                Representative 1             Representative 2


              Pl./Rep. 1’s strategy        Pl./Rep. 2’s strategy


                Player 1’s utility           Player 2’s utility



Figure 1: A diagram describing the meta-game in the case of two players.


played by the original players? If I instruct my representative to play the
SPI of Table 2 in the Demand Game, could my opponent not instruct her
representative to play DM?
    In this section, we briefly describe one way to fill this gap by discussing
the concept of program games and program equilibrium [46, Sect. 10.4, 55,
15, 5, 13, 36]. This section is essential to understanding why SPIs (especially
omnilateral ones) are relevant. However, the remaining technical content of
this paper does not rely on this section and the main ideas presented here
are straightforward from previous work. We therefore only give an informal
exposition. For formal detail, see Appendix A.
    For any game Γ = (A, u), the program equilibrium literature considers
the following meta game. First, each player i writes a computer program.
Each program then receives as input a vector containing everyone else’s cho-
sen program. Each player i’s program then returns an action from Ai , player
i’s set of actions in Γ. Together these actions then form an outcome a ∈ A
of the original game. Finally, the utilities u(a) are realized according to the
utility function of Γ. The meta game can be analyzed like any other game.
Its Nash equilibria are called program equilibria. Importantly, the program
equilibria can implement payoffs not implemented by any Nash equilibria
of Γ itself. For example, in the Prisoner’s Dilemma, both players can sub-
mit a program that says: “If the opponent’s chosen computer program is
equal to this computer program, Cooperate; otherwise Defect.” [33, 22,
46, Sect. 10.4, 55] This is a program equilibrium which implements mutual

                                      13
cooperation.
    In the setting for our paper, we similarly imagine that each player i
can write a program that in turn chooses from Ai . However, the types
of programs that we have in mind here are more sophisticated than those
typically considered in the program equilibrium literature. Specifically we
imagine that the programs are executed by intelligent representatives who
are themselves able to competently choose an action for player i in any given
game Γs , without the original player having to describe how this choice is
to be made. The original player may not even understand much about
this program other than that it generally plays well. Thus, in addition to
the elementary instructions used in a typical computer program (branches,
comparisons, arithmetic operations, return, etc.), we allow player i to use
instructions of type “Play Πi (Γs )” in the program she submits. This in-
struction lets the representative choose and return an action for the game
Γs . Apart from the addition of this instruction type, we imagine the set
of instructions to be the same as in the program equilibrium literature. To
jointly let the representatives play, e.g., the SPI Γs of Table 2 on the Demand
Game of Table 1, the representatives can both use an instruction that says,
“If the opponent’s chosen program is equal to this one, play Πi (Γs ); oth-
erwise play DM”. Assuming some minimal rationality requirements on the
representatives (i.e., on how the representative resolves the “play Πi (Γs )”
instruction), this is a Nash equilibrium. Figure 1 illustrates how (in the
two-player case) the meta game between the original players is intended to
work.
    For illustration consider the following two real-world instantiations of
this setup. First, we might imagine that the original players hire human
representatives. Each player specifies, e.g., via monetary incentives, how
she wants her representative to act by some contract. For example, a player
might contract her representative to play a particular action; or she might
specify in her contract a function (usi ) over outcomes according to which she
will pay the representative after an outcome is obtained. Moreover, these
contracts might refer to one another. For example, Player 1’s contract with
her representative might specify that if Player 2 and his representative use
an analogous contract, then she will pay her representative according to
Table 2. As a second, more futuristic scenario, you could imagine that the
representatives are software agents whose goals are specified by so-called
smart contracts, i.e., computer programs implemented on a blockchain to be
publicly verifiable [8, 47].
    To justify our study of SPIs, we prove that every SPI is played in some
program equilibrium:

                                      14
Theorem 1. Let Γ be a game and Γs be an SPI of Γ. Now consider a
program game on Γ, where each player i can choose from a set of computer
programs that output actions for Γ. In addition to the normal kind of in-
structions, we allow the use of the command “play Πi (Γ′ )” for any subset
game Γ′ of Γ. Finally, assume that Π(Γ) guarantees each player i at least
that player’s minimax utility (a.k.a. threat point) in the base game Γ. Then
Π(Γs ) is played in a program equilibrium, i.e., in a Nash equilibrium of the
program game.

    We prove this in Appendix A.
    As an alternative to having the original players choose contracts sepa-
rately, we could imagine the use of jointly signed contracts which only come
into effect once signed by all players [cf. 24, 34]. Another approach to bi-
lateral commitment was pursued by Raub [45] based on earlier work by Sen
[51]. Raub and Sen use preference modification as a mechanism for commit-
ment. For example, in the Prisoner’s Dilemma, each player can separately
instruct their representative to prefer cooperating over defecting if and only
if the opponent also cooperates. If both players use this instruction, then
mutual cooperation becomes the unique Pareto-optimal Nash equilibrium.
On the other hand, if only one player instructs their representative to adopt
these preferences and the other maintains the usual Prisoner’s Dilemma
preferences, the unique equilibrium remains mutual defection. Thus, the
preference modification is used to commit to cooperating conditional on the
other player making an analogous commitment. Because this is slightly
confusing in the context of our work – seeing as our work involves both
modifying one’s preferences and mutual commitment, but generally without
using the former as a means to the latter – we discuss Raub’s and Sen’s
work and its relation to ours in more detail in Appendix B.


4     Safe Pareto improvements through outcome cor-
      respondence
4.1   Multivalued functions
For sets M and N , a multi-valued function Φ : M ⊸ N is a function which
maps each element m ∈ M to a set Φ(m) ⊆ N . For a subset Q ⊆ M , we
define                               ⋃︂
                           Φ(Q) :=       Φ(m).
                                      m∈Q




                                     15
Note that Φ(Q) ⊆ N and that Φ(∅) = ∅. For any set M , we define the
identity function idM : M ⊸ M : m → {m}. Also, for two sets M and N ,
we define allM,N : M ⊸ N : m ↦→ N . We define the inverse
                  Φ−1 : N ⊸ M : n ↦→ {m ∈ M | n ∈ Φ(m)}.
Note that Φ−1 (∅) = ∅ for any multi-valued function Φ. For sets M , N
and Q and functions Φ : M ⊸ N and Ψ : N ⊸ Q, we define the composite
Ψ ◦ Φ : M ⊸ Q : m ↦→ Ψ(Φ(m)). As with regular functions, composition
of multi-valued functions is associative. We say that Φ : M ⊸ N is single-
valued if |Φ(m)| = 1 for all m ∈ M . Whenever a multi-valued function is
single-valued, we can apply many of the terms for regular functions. For ex-
ample, we will take injectivity, surjectivity, and bijectivity for single-valued
functions to have the usual meaning. We will never apply these notions to
non-single-valued functions.

4.2    Outcome correspondence between games
In this section, we introduce a notion of outcome correspondence, which we
will see is essential to constructing SPIs.
Definition 3. Consider two games Γ = (A1 , ..., An , u) and Γ′ = (A′1 , ..., A′n , u′ ).
We write Γ ∼Φ Γ′ for Φ : A ⊸ A′ if Π(Γ′ ) ∈ Φ(Π(Γ)) with certainty.
    Note that Γ ∼Φ Γ′ is a statement about Π, i.e., about how the represen-
tatives choose. Whether such a statement holds generally depends on the
specific representatives being used. In Section 4.4, we describe two general
circumstances under which it seems plausible that Γ ∼Φ Γ′ . For example, if
two games Γ and Γ′ are isomorphic, then one might expect Γ ∼Φ Γ′ , where
Φ is the isomorphism between the two games.
    We now illustrate this notation using our discussion from the Demand
Game. Let Γ be the Demand Game of Table 1. First, it seems plausible that
Γ is in some sense equivalent to Γ′ , where Γ′ = ({DM, RM, u) is the game
that results from removing DL and RL for both players from Γ. Again,
strict dominance could be given as an argument. We can now formalize
this as Γ ∼Φ Γ′ , where Φ(a1 , a2 ) = {(a1 , a2 )} if a1 , a2 ∈ {DM, RM} and
Φ(a1 , a2 ) = ∅ otherwise. Next, it seems plausible that Γ′ ∼Ψ Γs , where Γs
is the game of Table 2 and Ψ is the isomorphism between Γ′ and Γs .
    We now state some basic facts about the relation ∼, many of which we
will use throughout this paper.
Lemma 2. Let Γ = (A, u), Γ′ = (A′ , u′ ), Γ̂ = (Â, û) and Φ, Ξ : A ⊸ A′ ,
Ψ : A′ ⊸ Â.

                                        16
  1. Reflexivity: Γ ∼idA Γ, where idA : A ⊸ A : a ↦→ {a}.

  2. Symmetry: If Γ ∼Φ Γ′ , then Γ′ ∼Φ−1 Γ.

  3. Transitivity: If Γ ∼Φ Γ′ and Γ′ ∼Ψ Γ̂, then Γ ∼Ψ◦Φ Γ̂.

  4. If Γ ∼Φ Γ′ and Φ(a) ⊆ Ξ(a) for all a ∈ A, then Γ ∼Ξ Γ′ .

  5. Γ ∼allA,A′ Γ′ , where allA,A′ : A ⊸ A′ : a ↦→ A′ .

  6. If Γ ∼Φ Γ′ and Φ(a) = ∅, then Π(Γ) ̸= a with certainty.

  7. If Γ ∼Φ Γ′ and Φ−1 (a′ ) = ∅, then Π(Γ′ ) ̸= a′ with certainty.
Proof.    1. By reflexivity of equality, Π(Γ) = Π(Γ) with certainty. Hence,
      Π(Γ) ∈ idA (Π(Γ)) by definition of idA . Therefore, Γ ∼idA Γ by defini-
      tion of ∼, as claimed.

  2. Γ ∼Φ Γ′ means that Π(Γ′ ) ∈ Φ(Π(Γ)) with certainty. Thus,

                   Π(Γ) ∈ {a∈A | Π(Γ′ )∈Φ(a)} = Φ−1 (Π(Γ′ )),

     where equality is by the definition of the inverse of multi-valued func-
     tions. We conclude (by definition of ∼) that Γ′ ∼Φ−1 Γ as claimed.

  3. If Γ ∼Φ Γ′ , Γ′ ∼Ψ Γ̂, then by definition of ∼, (i) Π(Γ′ ) ∈ Φ(Π(Γ))
     and (ii) Π(Γ̂) ∈ Ψ(Π(Γ′ )), both with certainty. The former (i) implies
     {Π(Γ′ )} ⊆ Φ(Π(Γ)). Hence,

                      Ψ(Π(Γ′ )) = Ψ({Π(Γ′ )}) ⊆ Ψ(Φ(Π(Γ))).

     With ii, it follows that Π(Γ̂) ∈ Ψ(Φ(Π(Γ))) with certainty. By defini-
     tion, Γ ∼Ψ◦Φ Γ̂ as claimed.

  4. It is
                            Π(Γ′ ) ∈ Φ(Π(Γ)) ⊆ Ξ(Π(Γ))
     with certainty. Thus, by definition Γ ∼Ξ Γ′ .

  5. By definition of Π, it is Π(Γ′ ) ∈ A′ with certainty. By definition
     of allA,A′ , it is allA,A′ (Π(Γ)) = A′ with certainty. Hence, Π(Γ′ ) ∈
     allA,A′ (Π(Γ)) with certainty. We conclude that Γ ∼allA,A′ Γ′ as claimed.

  6. With certainty, Π(Γ′ ) ∈ Φ(Π(Γ)) (by assumption). Also, with cer-
     tainty Π(Γ′ ) ∈
                   / ∅. Hence, Φ(Π(Γ)) ̸= ∅ with certainty. We conclude
     that Π(Γ) ̸= a with certainty.

                                       17
   7. If Γ ∼Φ Γ′ , then by reflexivity of ∼ (Lemma 2.1) Γ′ ∼Φ−1 Γ. If
      Φ−1 (a′ ) = ∅, then by Lemma 2.6, Π(Γ′ ) ̸= a′ with certainty.


     Items 1–3 show that ∼ has properties resembling those of an equivalence
relation. Note, however, that since ∼ is not a binary relationship, ∼ itself
cannot be an equivalence relation in the usual sense. We can construct equiv-
alence relations, though, by existentially quantifying over the multivalued
function. For example, we might define an equivalence relation R on games,
where (Γ, Γ′ ) ∈ R if and only if there is a single-valued bijection Φ such that
Γ ∼Φ Γ′ .3 Item 4 states that if we can make an outcome correspondence
claim less precise, it will still hold true. Item 5 states that in the extreme,
it is always Γ ∼allA,A′ Γ′ , where allA,A′ is the trivial, maximally imprecise
outcome correspondence function that confers no information. Item 6 shows
that ∼ can be used to express the elimination of outcomes, i.e., the belief
that a particular outcome (or strategy) will never occur.
     Besides an equivalence relation, we can also use ∼ with quantification
over the respective outcome correspondence function to construct (non-
symmetric) preorders over games, i.e., relations that are transitive and re-
flexive (but not symmetric or antisymmetric). Most importantly, we can
construct a preorder ⪰ on games where Γ ⪰ Γ′ if Γ ∼Φ Γ′ for a Φ that
always increases every player’s utilities.

4.3    A theorem connecting outcome correspondence with safe
       Pareto improvements
We now show that as advertised, outcome correspondence is closely tied to
SPIs. The following theorem shows not only how outcome correspondences
can be used to find (and prove) SPIs. It also shows that any SPI requires
an outcome correspondence relation via a Pareto-improving correspondence
function.
Definition 4. Let Γ = (A, u) be a game and Γs = (As , us ) be a subset game
of Γ. Further let Φ : A → As be such that Γ ∼Φ Γ′ . We call Φ a Pareto-
improving outcome correspondence (function) if u(as ) ≥ u(a) for all a ∈ A
and all as ∈ Φ(a).
   3
    Note that the fact that this is an equivalence relation relies on the following three
facts:
    1. For reflexivity of R: The identity function id is a single-valued bijection.
    2. For symmetry of R: If Φ is a single-valued bijection, so is Φ−1 .
    3. For transitivity of R: If Ψ, Φ are bijections, so is Ψ ◦ Φ.



                                           18
Theorem 3. Let Γ = (A, u) be a game and Γs = (As , us ) be a subset game
of Γ. Then Γs is an SPI on Γ if and only if there is a Pareto-improving
outcome correspondence from Γ to Γs .

Proof. ⇐: By definition, Π(Γs ) ∈ Φ(Π(Γ)) with certainty. Hence, for i =
1, 2,
                        ui (Π(Γs )) ∈ ui (Φ(Π(Γ)))
with certainty. Hence, by assumption about Φ, with certainty, ui (Π(Γs )) ≥
ui (Π(Γ)).
    ⇒: Assume that ui (Π(Γ)) ≥ ui (Π(Γs )) with certainty for i = 1, 2. We
define
                Φ : A → As : a ↦→ {as ∈ As | u(as ) ≥ u(a)} .
It is immediately obvious that Φ is Pareto-improving as required. Also,
whenever Π(Γ) = a and Π(Γs ) = as for any a ∈ A and as ∈ As , it is (by
assumption) with certainty u(as ) ≥ u(a). Thus, by definition of Φ, it holds
that as ∈ Φ(a). We conclude that Γ ∼Φ Γs as claimed.

    Note that the theorem concerns weak SPIs and therefore allows the case
where with certainty u(Π(Γ)) = u(Π(Γs )). To show that some Γs is a strict
SPI, we need additional information about which outcomes occur with posi-
tive probability. This, too, can be expressed via our outcome correspondence
relation. However, since this is cumbersome, we will not formally address
strictness much to keep things simple.4
    We now illustrate how outcome correspondences can be used to derive
the SPI for the Demand Game from the introduction as per Theorem 3.
Of course, at this point we have not made any assumptions about when
games are equivalent. We will introduce some in the following section. Nev-
ertheless, we can already sketch the argument using the specific outcome
correspondences that we have given intuitive arguments for. Let Γ again be
the Demand Game of Table 1. Then, as we have argued, Γ ∼Φ Γ′ , where
Γ′ = ({DM, RM}, {DM, RM}, u) is the game that results from removing DL
and RL for both players; and Φ(a1 , a2 ) = {(a1 , a2 )} if a1 , a2 ∈ {DM, RM}
and Φ(a1 , a2 ) = ∅ otherwise. In a second step, Γ′ ∼Ψ Γs , where Γs is the
game of Table 2 and Ψ is the isomorphism between Γ′ and Γs . Finally,
transitivity (Lemma 2.3) implies that Γ ∼Ψ◦Φ Γs . To see that Ψ ◦ Φ is
Pareto-improving for the original utility functions of Γ, notice that Φ does
not change utilities at all. The correspondence function Ψ maps the conflict
  4
    For an SPI Γs to be also be a strict SPI on Γ, there must be as which strictly Pareto-
dominates a such that for all Φ with Γ ∼Φ Γs , it must be as ∈ Φ(a).



                                           19
outcome (DM, DM) onto the outcome (DL, DL), which is better for both
original players. Other than that, Ψ, too, does not change the utilities.
Hence, Ψ ◦ Φ is Pareto-improving. By Theorem 3, Γs is therefore an SPI on
Γ.
    In principle, Theorem 3 does not hinge on Π(Γ) and Π(Γs ) resulting from
playing games. An analogous result holds for any random variables over A
and As . In particular, this means that Theorem 3 applies also if the repre-
sentatives receive other kinds of instructions (cf. Section 3.2). However, it
seems hard to establish non-trivial outcome correspondences between Π(Γ)
and other types of instructions. Still, the use of more complicated instruc-
tions can be used to derive different kinds of SPIs. For example, if there are
different game SPIs, then the original players could tell their representatives
to randomize between them in a coordinated way.

4.4     Assumptions about outcome correspondence
To make any claims about how the original players should play the meta-
game, i.e., about what instructions they should submit, we generally need to
make assumptions about how the representatives choose and (by Theorem 3)
about outcome correspondence in particular.5 We here make two fairly weak
assumptions.

4.4.1    Elimination
Our first is that the representatives never play strictly dominated actions
and that removing them does not affect what the representatives would
choose.

Assumption 1. Let Γ = (A, u) be an arbitrary n-player game where
A1 , ..., An are pairwise disjoint, and let ãi ∈ Ai be strictly dominated by some
other strategy in Ai . Then Γ ∼Φ (A−i , Ai − {ãi }, u|(A−i ,Ai −{ãi }) ), where for
all a−i ∈ A−i , Φ(ãi , a−i ) = ∅ and Φ(ai , a−i ) = {(ai , a−i )} whenever ai ̸= ãi .

    Assumption 1 expresses that representatives should never play strictly
dominated strategies. Moreover, it states that we can remove strictly dom-
inated strategies from a game and the resulting game will be played in the
same way by the representatives. For example, this implies that when eval-
uating a strategy ai , the representatives do not take into account how many
   5
     There are trivial, uninteresting cases in which no assumptions are needed. In particu-
lar, if a game Γ has an outcome a that Pareto dominates all other outcomes of the game,
then (by Lemma 2.5 with Theorem 3) any game Γs = (As = {a}, us ) is an SPI on Γ.


                                            20
other strategies ai strictly dominates. Assumption 1 also allows (via Tran-
sitivity of ∼ as per Lemma 2.3) the iterated removal of strictly dominated
strategies. The notion that we can (iteratively) remove strictly dominated
strategies is common in game theory [41, 27, 39, Section 2.9, Chapter 12]
and has rarely been questioned. It is also implicit in the solution concept
of Nash equilibrium – if a strategy is removed by iterated strict dominance,
that strategy is played in no Nash equilibrium. However, like the concept of
Nash equilibrium, the elimination of strictly dominated strategies becomes
implausible if the game is not played in the usual way. In particular, for
Assumption 1 to hold, we will in most games Γ have to assume that the
representatives cannot in turn make credible commitments (or delegate to
further subrepresentatives) or play the game iteratively [4].

4.4.2   Isomorphisms
Our second assumption is that the representatives play isomorphic games
isomorphically when those games are fully reduced.

Assumption 2. Let Γ = (A, u) and Γ′ = (A′ , u′ ) be two games that do not
contain strictly dominated actions. If Γ and Γ′ are isomorphic, then there
exists an isomorphism Φ between Γ and Γ′ such that Γ ∼Φ Γ′ .

    Similar desiderata have been discussed in the context of equilibrium se-
lection, e.g., by Harsanyi and Selten [20, Chapter 3.4] [cf. 56, for a discussion
in the context of fully cooperative multi-agent reinforcement learning].
    Note that if there are multiple game isomorphisms, then we assume
outcome correspondence for only one of them. This is necessary for the
assumption to be satisfiable in the case of games with action symmetries.
(Of course, such games are not the focus of this paper.) For example, let Γ
be Rock–Paper–Scissors. Then Γ is isomorphic to itself via the function Φ
that for both players maps Rock to Paper, Paper to Scissors, and Scissors to
Rock. But if it were Γ ∼Φ Γ, then this would mean that if the representatives
play Rock in Rock–Paper–Scissors, they play Paper in Rock–Paper–Scissors.
Contradiction! We will argue for the consistency of our version of the as-
sumption in Section 4.4.3. Notice also that we make the assumption only for
reduced games. This relates to the previous point about action-symmetric
games. For example, consider two versions of Rock–Paper–Scissors and
assume that in both versions both players have an additional strictly domi-
nated action that breaks the action symmetries e.g., the action, “resign and
give the opponent $10 if they play Rock/Paper”. Then there would only be



                                       21
one isomorphism between these two games (which maps Rock to Paper, Pa-
per to Scissors, and Scissors to Rock for both players). However, in light of
Assumption 1, it seems problematic to assume that these strictly dominated
actions restrict the outcome correspondences between these two games.6
    One might worry that reasoning about the existence of multiple iso-
morphisms renders it intractable to deal with outcome correspondences as
implied by Assumption 2, and in particular that it might make it impossible
to tell whether a particular game is an SPI. However, one can intuitively see
that the different isomorphisms between two games do analogous operations.
In particular, it turns out that if one isomorphism is Pareto-improving, then
they all are:

Lemma 4. Let Φ and Ψ be isomorphisms between Γ and Γ′ . If Φ is (strictly)
Pareto-improving, then so is Ψ.

     We prove Lemma 4 in Appendix C.
     Lemma 4 will allow us to conclude from the existence of a Pareto-
improving isomorphism Φ that there is a Pareto-improving Ψ s.t. Γ ∼Ψ Γ′
by Assumption 2, even if there are multiple isomorphisms between Γ and
Γ′ . In the following, we can therefore afford to be lax about our ignorance
(in some games) about which outcome isomorphism induces outcome equiva-
lence. We will therefore generally write “Γ ∼Φ Γ′ by Assumption 2” as short
for “Φ is a game isomorphism between Γ and Γ′ and hence by Assumption 2
there exists an isomorphism Ψ such that Γ ∼Ψ Γ′ ”.
     One could criticize Assumption 2 by referring to focal points (introduced
by Schelling [49, 48, pp. 54–58] [cf., e.g., 30, 18, 54, 9]) as an example where
context and labels of strategies matter. A possible response might be that
in games where context plays a role, that context should be included as
additional information and not be considered part of (A, u). Assumption 2
would then either not apply to such games with (relevant) context or would
require one to, in some way, translate the context along with the strategies.
However, in this paper we will not formalize context, and assume that there
is no decision-relevant context.

4.4.3    Consistency of Assumptions 1 and 2
We will now argue that there exist representatives that indeed satisfy As-
sumptions 1 and 2, both to provide intuition and because our results would
   6
    In fact, depending on formal details we omit throughout this paper – how to quantify
over games in these assumptions, what type of objects actions are, etc. a more general
version of Assumption 2 threatens to yield a contradiction with Assumption 1 again.


                                          22
not be valuable if Assumptions 1 and 2 were inconsistent. We will only
sketch the argument informally. To make the argument formal, we would
need to specify in more detail what the set of games looks like and in par-
ticular what the objects of the action sets are.
     Imagine that for each player i there is a book7 that on each page describes
a normal-form game that does not have any strictly dominated strategies.
The actions have consecutive integer labels. Importantly, the book contains
no pair of games that are isomorphic to each other. Moreover, for every fully
reduced game, the book contains a game that is isomorphic to this game.
(Unless we strongly restrict the set of games under consideration, the book
must therefore have infinitely many pages.) We imagine that each player’s
book contains the same set of games. On each page, the book for Player i
recommends one of the actions of Player i to be taken deterministically.8
     Each representative owns a potentially different version of this book and
uses it as follows to play a given game Γ. First the given game is fully
reduced by iterated strict dominance to obtain a game Γred . They then
look up the unique game in the book that is isomorphic to Γred and map the
action labels in Γred onto the integer labels of the game in the book via some
isomorphism. If there are multiple isomorphisms from Γred to the relevant
page in the book, then all representatives decide between them using the
same deterministic procedure. Finally they choose the action recommended
by the book.
     It is left to show a pair of representatives Π thus specified satisfies As-
sumptions 1 and 2. We first argue that Assumption 1 is satisfied. Let Γ be
a game and let Γ′ be a game that arises from removing a strictly dominated
action from Γ. By the well known path independence of iterated elimination
of strictly dominated strategies [1, 19, 41], fully reducing Γ and Γ′ results in
the same game. Hence, the representatives play the same actions in Γ and
Γ′ .
     Second, we argue that Assumption 2 is satisfied. Let us say Γ and Γ̂
are fully reduced and isomorphic. Then it is easy to see that each player i
plays Γ and Γ̂ based on the same page of their book. Let the game on that
book page be Γ̃. Let Φ : A → Ã and Φ′ : A′ → Ã be the bijections used by
the representatives to translate actions in Γ and Γ′ , respectively, to labels
   7
    The use of a book as illustration is inspired by Binmore [6, Section 1].
   8
    Of course, in many cases (such as Rock–Paper–Scissors) it is implausible for the
players to choose deterministically. The idea is that in such games the randomization was
performed in the process of printing. If the book is intended to be used multiple times, we
may imagine that a sequence of (randomly generated) actions is provided (à la the RAND
Corporation’s book of random numbers).



                                            23
in Γ̃. Then if the representatives take actions a in Γ, the actions Φ(a) are
                                                                −1
the ones specified by the book for Γ̃, and hence the actions Φ̂ (Φ(a)) are
                                                            −1
played in Γ′ . Thus Γ ∼Φ̂−1 ◦Φ Γ̂. It is easy to see that Φ̂ ◦ Φ is a game
isomorphism between Γ and Γ̂.

4.4.4   Discussion of alternatives to Assumptions 1 and 2
One could try to use principles other than Assumptions 1 and 2. We here
give some considerations. First, game theorists have also considered the
iterated elimination of weakly dominated strategies [17, 31, Section 4.11].
Unfortunately, the iterated removal of weakly dominated strategies is path-
dependent [27, Section 2.7.B, 7, Section 5.2, 39, Section 12.3]. That is,
for some games, iterated removal of weakly dominated strategies can lead
to different subset games, depending on which weakly dominated strategy
one chooses to eliminate at any stage. A straightforward extension of As-
sumption 1 to allow the elimination of weakly dominated strategies would
therefore be inconsistent in such games, which can be seen as follows. Work
on the path dependence of iterated removal of weakly dominated strategies
has shown that there are games (A, u) with two different outcomes ã, â ∈ A
such that by iterated removal of weakly dominated strategies from Γ, we
can obtain both ({ã}, u) and ({â}, u). If we had an assumption analogous
to Assumption 1 but for weak dominance, then (with Lemma 2.3 (transi-
tivity)), we would obtain both that Γ ∼Φ̃ ({ã}, u) and that Γ ∼Φ̂ ({â}, u),
where Φ̃(a) = ∅ for all a ̸= ã and Φ̂(a) = ∅ for all a ̸= â. The former
would mean (by Lemma 2.6) that for all a ̸= ã we have that Π(Γ) ̸= a
with certainty; while the latter would mean that that a ̸= â we have that
Π(Γ) ̸= a with certainty. But jointly this means that for all a ∈ A, we have
that Π(Γ) ̸= a with certainty, which cannot be the case as Π(Γ) ∈ A by def-
inition. Thus, we cannot make an assumption analogous to Assumption 1
for weak dominance.
    As noted above, the iterated removal of strictly dominated strategies,
on the other hand, is path-independent, and in the 2-player case always
eliminates exactly the non-rationalizable strategies [1, 19, 41]. Many other
dominance concepts have been shown to have path independence properties.
For an overview, see Apt [1]. We could have made an independence assump-
tion based any of these path-independent dominance concepts. For example,
elimination of strategies that are strictly dominated by a mixed strategy (or,
equivalently, of so-called never-best responses) is also path independent [40,
Section 4.2].


                                     24
    With Assumptions 1 and 2, all our outcome correspondence functions
are either 1-to-1 or 1-to-0. Other elimination assumptions could involve the
use of many-to-1 or even many-to-many functions. In general, such func-
tions are needed when a strategy ãi can be eliminated to obtain a strategi-
cally equivalent game, but in the original game ãi may still be played. The
simplest example would be the elimination of payoff-equivalent strategies.
Imagine that in some game Γ for all opponent strategies a−i ∈ A−i it is the
case that u(ãi , a−i ) = u(âi , a−i ) and that there are no other strategies that
are similarly payoff-equivalent to ãi and âi . Then one would assume that
Γ ∼Φ (Ai − {ãi }, A−i , u), where Φ maps ãi onto {âi } and otherwise Φ is
just the identity function. As an example, imagine a variant of the Demand
Game in which Player 1 has an additional action DM′ that results in the
same payoffs as DM for both players against Player 2’s DM and RM but
potentially slightly different payoffs against DL and RL. With our current
assumptions we would be unable to derive a non-trivial SPI for this game.
However, with an assumption about the elimination of duplicate actions in
hand, we could (after removing DL and RL as usual) remove DM′ or DM and
thereby derive the usual SPI. Many-to-1 elimination assumptions can also
arise from some dominance concepts if they have weaker path independence
properties. For example, iterated elimination by so-called nice weak dom-
inance [32] is only path-independent up to strategic equivalence. Like the
assumption about payoff-equivalent strategies, an elimination assumption
based on nice weak dominance therefore cannot assume that the eliminated
action is not played in the original game at all.

4.5    Examples
In this section, we use Lemma 2, Theorem 3, and Assumptions 1 and 2 to
formally prove a few SPIs.

Proposition (Example) 5. Let Γ be the Prisoner’s Dilemma (Table 3) and
Γs = (As1 , As2 , us1 , us2 ) be any subset game of Γ with As1 = As2 = {Cooperate}.
Then under Assumption 1, Γs is a strict SPI on Γ.

Proof. By applying Assumption 1 twice and Transitivity once, Γ ∼Φ ΓD ,
where ΓD = ({Defect}, {Defect}, u) and Φ(Defect, Defect) = {(Defect, Defect)}
and Φ(a1 , a2 ) = ∅ for all (a1 , a2 ) ̸= (Defect, Defect). By Lemma 2.5, we fur-
ther obtain ΓD ∼all Γs , where Γs is as described in the proposition. Hence,
by transitivity, Γ ∼all◦Φ Γs . It is easy to verify that the function all ◦ Φ is
Pareto-improving.


                                        25
                                       Player 2’s representative
                                           C              F
                                 T        1, 2           5, 1
               Player 1’s rep.
                                 R        0, 0           4, 4


                      Table 6: Simple Temptation Game

Proposition (Example) 6. Let Γ be the Demand Game of Table 1 and Γs
be the subset game described in Table 2. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, Γs is
an SPI on Γ. Further, if P (Π(Γ)=(DM, DM)) > 0, then Γs is a strict SPI.
Proof. Let (A1 , A2 , u1 , u2 ) = Γ. We can repeatedly apply Assumption 1
to eliminate from Γ the strategies DL and RL for both players. We
can then apply Lemma 2.3 (Transitivity) to obtain Γ ∼Φ Γ̂, where Γ̂ =
({DM, RM}, {DM, RM}, u1 , u2 ) and
                            {︃
                                {(a1 , a2 )} if a1 , a2 ∈ {DM, RM}
            Φ(a1 , a2 ) =                                          .
                                    ∅        otherwise

Next, by Assumption 2, Γ̂ ∼Ψ Γs , where Ψi (DM) = DL and Ψi (RM) = RL
for i = 1, 2. We can then apply Lemma 2.3 (Transitivity) again, to infer
Γ ∼Ψ◦Φ Γs . It is easy to verify that for all (a1 , a2 ) ∈ A1 × A2 , it is for all
(as1 , as2 ) ∈ Ψ(Φ(Γs )) the case that u(as1 , as2 ) ≥ u(a1 , a2 ).


    Next, we give two examples of unilateral SPIs. We start with an example
that is trivial in that the original player instructs her resentatives to take a
specific action. We then give the SPI for the Complicated Temptation game
as a non-trivial example.
    Consider the Temptation Game given in Table 6. In this game, Player
1’s T (for Temptation) strictly dominates R. Once R is removed, Player 2
prefers C. Hence, this game is strict-dominance solvable to (T, C). Player 1
can safely Pareto-improve on this result by telling her representative to play
R, since Player 2’s best response to R is F and u(R, F ) = (4, 4) > (1, 2) =
u(T, C). We now show this formally.
Proposition (Example) 7. Let Γ = (A1 , A2 , u1 , u2 ) be the game of Table 6.
Under Assumption 1, Γs = ({R}, A2 , u1 , u2 ) is a strict SPI on Γ.
Proof. First consider Γ. We can apply Assumption 1 to eliminate Player
1’s R1 and then apply Assumption 1 again to the resulting game to also

                                       26
eliminate Player 2’s R. By transitivity, we find Γ ∼Φ Γ′ , where Γ′ =
({T }, {C}, u1 , u2 ) and Φ(T, C) = {(T, C)} and Φ(A1 × A2 − {(T, C)}) = ∅.
    Next, consider Γs . We can apply Assumption 1 to remove Player 2’s
                               s         s
strategy C and find Γs ∼Ψ Γ̂ , where Γ̂ = ({R}, {F }, u1 , u2 ) and Ψ(R, F ) =
{(R, F )} and Ψ(R, C) = ∅.
                       s
    Third, Γ′ ∼all Γ̂ by Lemma 2.5, where all(T, C) = {(R, F )}.
    Finally, we can apply transitivity to conclude Γ ∼Ξ Γs , where Ξ = Ψ−1 ◦
all◦Φ. It is easy to verify that Ξ(T, C) = (R, F ) and Ξ(A1 ×A2 −{(R, F )}) =
∅. Hence, Ξ is Pareto-improving and so by Theorem 3, Γs is an SPI on Γ.
    Note that in this example, Player 1 simply commits to a particular strat-
egy R and Player 2 maximizes their utility given Player 1’s choice. Hence,
this SPI can be justified with much simpler unilateral commitment setups
[11, 52, 59]. For example, if the Temptation Game was played as a sequential
game in which Player 1 plays first, its unique subgame-perfect equilibrium
is (R, F ).
    In Table 4 we give the Complicated Temptation Game, which better
illustrates the features specific to our setup. Roughly, it is an extension of
the simpler Temptation Game of Table 6. In addition to choosing T versus
R and C versus F , the players also have to make an additional choice (1
versus 2), which is difficult in that it cannot be solved by strict dominance.
As we have argued in Section 3.1, the game in Table 5 is a unilateral SPI
on Table 4. We can now show this formally.
Proposition (Example) 8. Let Γ be the Complicated Temptation Game
(Table 4) and Γs be the subset game in Table 5. Under Assumptions 1 and 2,
Γs is a unilateral SPI on Γ.
Proof. In Γ, for Player 1, T1 and T2 strictly dominate R1 and R2 . We can
thus apply Assumption 1 to eliminate Player 1’s R1 and R2 . In the resulting
game, Player 2’s C1 and C2 strictly dominate F1 and F2 , so one can apply
Assumption 1 again to the resulting game to also eliminate Player 2’s F1 and
F2 . By transitivity, we find Γ ∼Φ Γ′ , where Γ′ = ({T1 , T2 }, {C1 , C2 }, u1 , u2 )
and
                     {︃
                        {(a1 , a2 )} if a1 ∈ {T1 , T2 } and a2 ∈ {C1 , C2 }
       Φ(a1 , a2 ) =                                                        .
                            ∅        otherwise
   Next, consider Γs (Table 5). We can apply Assumption 1 to re-
                                                                    s           s
move Player 2’s strategies C1 and C2 and find Γs ∼Ψ Γ̂ , where Γ̂ =
({R1 , R2 }, {F1 , F2 }, us1 , u2 ) and
                      {︃
                          {(a1 , a2 )} if a1 ∈ {R1 , R2 } and a2 ∈ {F1 , F2 }
       Ψ(a1 , a2 ) =                                                          .
                                 ∅      otherwise

                                         27
                     s
    Third, Γ′ ∼Ξ Γ̂ by Assumption 2, where Ξ decomposes into Ξ1 and
Ξ2 , corresponding to the two players, respectively, where Ξ1 (Ti ) = Ri and
Ξ2 (Ci ) = Fi for i = 1, 2.
    Finally, we can apply transitivity and the rule about symmetry and
inverses (Lemma 2.2) to conclude Γ ∼Ψ−1 ◦Ξ◦Φ Γs . It is easy to verify that
Ψ−1 ◦ Ξ ◦ Φ is Pareto-improving.

4.6    Computing safe Pareto improvements
In this section, we ask how computationally costly it is for the original
players to identify for a given game Γ a non-trivial SPI Γs . Of course, the
answer to this question depends on what the original players are willing
to assume about how their representatives act. For example, if only trivial
outcome correspondences (as per Lemma 2.1 and 2.5) are assumed, then the
decision problem is easy. Similarly, if Γ ∼Φ Γ′ for given Φ is hard to decide
(e.g., because it requires solving for the Nash equilibria of Γ and Γ′ ), then
this could trivially also make the safe Pareto improvement problem hard to
decide. We specifically are interested in deciding whether a given game Γ
has a non-trivial SPI that can be proved using only Assumptions 1 and 2,
the general properties of game correspondence (in particular Transitivity
(Lemma 2.3), Symmetry (Lemma 2.2) and Theorem 3).

Definition 5. The SPI decision problem consists in deciding for any given
Γ, whether there is a game Γs and a sequence of outcome correspondences
Φ1 , ..., Φk and a sequence of subset games Γ0 = Γ, Γ1 , ..., Γk = Γs of Γ s.t.:
   1. (Non-triviality:) If we fully reduce Γs and Γ using iterated strict dom-
        inance (Assumption 1), the two resulting games are not equal. (Of
        course, they are allowed to be isomorphic.)
   2. For i = 1, ..., k, Γi−1 ∼Φi Γi is valid by a single application of either
        Assumption 1 or Assumption 2, or an application of Assumption 1 in
        reverse via Lemma 2.2.
   3. For all a ∈ A, and whenever as ∈ (Φk ◦ Φk−1 ◦ ... ◦ Φ1 )(a), it is the
        case that u(as ) ≥ u(a).
For the strict SPI decision problem, we further require:
 (4.) There is a player i and an outcome a that survives iterated elimination
        of strictly dominated strategies from Γ s.t. ui ((Φk ◦Φk−1 ◦...◦Φ1 )(a)) >
        ui (a).
For the unilateral SPI decision problem, we further require:
 (5.) For all but one of the players i, ui = usi and Ai = Asi .



                                       28
     Many variants of this problem may be considered. For example, to match
Definition 1, the definition of the strict SPI problem assumes that all out-
comes a that survive iterated elimination occur with positive probability.
Alternatively we could have required that for demonstrating strictness, there
must be a player i such that for all a ∈ A that survive iterated elimination,
ui ((Φk ◦ Φk−1 ◦ ... ◦ Φ1 )(a)) > ui (a). Similarly one may wish to find SPIs
that are strict improvements for all players. We may also wish to allow the
use of the elimination of duplicate strategies (as described in Section 4.4.4)
or trivial outcome correspondence steps as per Lemma 2.5. These modifica-
tions would not change the computational complexity of the problem, nor
would they require new proof ideas. One may also wish to compute all SPIs,
or – in line with multi-criteria optimization [14, 58] – all SPIs that cannot
in turn be safely Pareto-improved upon. However, in general there may
exist exponentially many such SPIs. To retain any hope of developing an
efficient algorithm, one would therefore have to first develop a more efficient
representation scheme [cf. 42, Sect. 16.4].

Theorem 9. The (strict) (unilateral) SPI decision problem is NP-complete,
even for 2-player games.

Proposition 10. For games Γ with |A1 | + ... + |An | = m that can be reduced
(via iterative application of Assumption 1) to a game Γ′ with |A′1 | + ... +
|A′n | = l, the (strict) (unilateral) SPI decision problem can be solved in
O(ml ).

    The full proof is tedious (see Appendix D), but the main idea is simple,
especially for omnilateral SPIs. To find an omnilateral SPI on Γ based on As-
sumptions 1 and 2, one has to first iteratively remove all strictly dominated
actions to obtain a reduced game Γ′ , which the representatives would play
the same as the original game. This can be done in polynomial time. One
then has to map the actions Γ′ onto the original Γ in such a way that each
outcome in Γ′ is mapped onto a weakly Pareto-better outcome in Γ. Our
proof of NP-hardness works by reducing from the subgraph isomorphism
problem, where the payoff matrices of Γ′ and Γ represent the adjacency
matrices of the graphs.
    Besides being about a specific set of assumptions about ∼, note that
Theorem 9 and Proposition 10 also assume that the utility function of the
game is represented explicitly in normal form as a payoff matrix. If we
changed the game representation (e.g., to boolean circuits, extensive form
game trees, quantified boolean formulas, or even Turing machines), this can


                                      29
affect the complexity of the SPI problem. For example, Gabarró, Garcı́a,
and Serna [16] show that the game isomorphism problem on normal-form
games is equivalent to the graph isomorphism problem, while it is equivalent
to the (likely computationally harder) boolean circuit isomorphism problem
for a weighted boolean formula game representation. Solving the SPI prob-
lem requires solving a subset game isomorphism problem (see the proof of
Lemma 28 in Appendix D for more detail). We therefore suspect that the
SPI problem analogously increases in computational complexity (perhaps to
being Σp2 -complete) if we treat games in a weighted boolean formula rep-
resentation. In fact, even reducing a game using strict dominance by pure
strategies – which contributes only insignificantly to the complexity of the
SPI problem for normal-form games – is difficult in some game representa-
tions [10, Section 6]. Note, however, that for any game representation to
which 2-player normal-form games can be efficiently reduced – such as, for
example, extensive-form games – the hardness result also applies.


5     Safe Pareto improvements under improved co-
      ordination
5.1   Setup
In this section, we imagine that the players are able to simply invent new
token strategies with new payoffs that arise from mixing existing feasible
payoffs. To define this formally, we first define for any game Γ = (A, u),
                       {︄            ⃓                                    }︄
                          ∑︂         ⃓ ∑︂
   C(Γ) := u(∆(A)) =         pa u(a) ⃓     pa = 1 and ∀a ∈ A : pa ∈ [0, 1]
                                     ⃓
                                     ⃓
                         a∈A          a∈A

to be the set of payoff vectors that are feasible by some correlated strategy.
The underlying notion of correlated strategies is the same as in correlated
equilibrium [2, 3], but in this paper it will not be relevant whether any such
strategy is a correlated equilibrium of Γ. Instead their use will hinge on the
use of commitments [cf. 34]. Note that C(Γ) is exactly the convex closure
of u(A), i.e., the convex closure of the set of deterministically achievable
utilities of the original game.
    For any game Γ, we then imagine that in addition to subset games, the
players can let the representatives play a perfect-coordination token game
(As , us , ue ), where for all i, Asi ∩ Ai = ∅ and usi : As → R are arbitrary
utility functions to be used by the representatives and ue : As → C(Γ) are
the utilities that the original players assign to the token strategies.

                                     30
    The instruction (As , us , ue ) lets the representatives play the game (As , us )
as usual. However, the strategies As are imagined to be meaningless token
strategies which do not resolve the given game Γ. Once some token strate-
gies as are selected, these are translated into some probability distribution
over A, i.e., into a correlated strategy of the original game. This correlated
strategy is then played by the original players, thus giving rise to (expected)
utilities ue (as ) ∈ C(Γ). These distributions and thus utilities are specified
by the original players.
Definition 6. Let Γ be a game. A perfect-coordination SPI for Γ is
a perfect-coordination token game (As , us , ue ) for Γ s.t. ue (Π(As , us )) ≥
u(Π(Γ)) with certainty. We call (As , us , ue ) a strict perfect-coordination
SPI if there furthermore is a player i for whom uei (Π(As , us )) > ui (Π(Γ))
with positive probability.
    As an example, imagine that Γ is just the DM-RM subset game of the
Demand Game of Table 1. Then, intuitively, an SPI under improved co-
ordination could consist of the original players telling the representatives,
“Play as if you were playing the DM-RM subset game of the Demand Game,
but whenever you find yourself playing (DM, DM), randomize [according to
some given distribution] between the other (Pareto-optimal) outcomes in-
stead”. Formally, As1 = {D̂, R̂} and As2 = {D̂, R̂} would then consist of
tokenized versions of the original strategies. The utility functions us1 and us2
are then simply the same as in the original Demand Game except that they
are applied to the token strategies. For example, us (D̂, R̂) = (2, 0). The util-
ities for the original players remove the conflict outcome. For example, the
original players might specify ue (D̂, D̂) = (1, 1), representing that the repre-
sentatives are supposed to play (RM, RM) in the (D̂, D̂) case. For all other
outcomes (â1 , â2 ), it must be the case that ue (â1 , â2 ) = us (â1 , â2 ) because
the other outcomes cannot be Pareto-improved upon. As with our earlier
SPIs for the Demand Game, Assumption 2 implies that Γ ∼Φ Γs , where
Φ maps the original conflict outcome (DM, DM) onto the Pareto-optimal
(D̂,D̂).
    Relative to the SPIs considered up until now, these new types of instruc-
tions put significant additional requirements on how the representatives in-
teract. They now have to engage in a two-round process of first choosing
and observing one another’s token strategies and then playing a correlated
strategy for the original game. Further, it must be the case that this ad-
ditional coordination does not affect the payoffs of the original outcomes.
The latter may not be the case in, e.g., the Game of Chicken. That is,
we could imagine a Game of Chicken in which coordination is possible but

                                           31
that the rewards of the game change if the players do coordinate. After all,
the underlying story in the Game of Chicken is that the positive reward –
admiration from peers – is attained precisely for accepting a grave risk.

5.2   Finding safe Pareto improvement under improved rep-
      resentative coordination
With these more powerful ways to instruct representatives, we can now re-
place individual outcomes of the default game ad libitum. For example,
in the reduced Demand Game, we singled out the outcome (DM, DM) as
Pareto-suboptimal and replaced it by a Pareto-optimal outcome, while keep-
ing all other outcomes the same. This allows us to construct SPIs in many
more games than before.

Definition 7. The strict full-coordination SPI decision problem consists in
deciding for any given Γ whether under Assumption 2 there is a perfect-
coordination SPI Γs for Γ.

Lemma 11. For a given n-player game Γ and payoff vector y ∈ Rn , it can
be decided by linear programming and thus in polynomial time whether y is
Pareto-optimal in C(Γ).

   For an introduction to linear programming, see, e.g., Schrijver [50]. In
short, a linear program is a specific type of constrained optimization problem
that can be solved efficiently.

Proof. Finding a Pareto improvement on a given y ∈ Rn can be formulated
as the following linear program:

                Variables: pa ∈ [0, 1] for all a ∈ A
                            n
                               (︄              )︄
                           ∑︂     ∑︂
                Maximize              pa ui (a) − yi
                              i=1    a∈A
                              ∑︂
                       s.t.         pa = 1
                              a∈A
                              ∑︂
                                    pa ui (a) ≥ yi for i = 1, ..., n
                              a∈A




                                        32
 Algorithm 1: An algorithm for deciding the strict perfect-
 coordination SPI problem.
   Data: Game Γ, set supp(Π(Γ)
 1 for a ∈ supp(Π(Γ)) do
 2    if u(a) is Pareto-suboptimal within C(Γ) then
 3        Return True;

 4 Return False;




     Based on Lemma 11, Algorithm 1 decides whether there is a strict
perfect-coordination SPI for a given game Γ.
     It is easy to see that this algorithm runs in polynomial time (in the size
of, e.g., the normal form representation of the game). It is also correct: if it
returns True, simply replace the Pareto-suboptimal outcome while keeping
all other outcomes the same; if it returns False, then all outcomes are Pareto-
optimal within C(Γ) and so there can be no strict SPI. We summarize this
result in the following proposition.

Proposition 12. Assuming supp(Π(Γ)) is known and that Assumption 2
holds, it can be decided in polynomial time whether there is a strict perfect-
coordination SPI.

5.3    Characterizing safe Pareto improvements under improved
       representative coordination
From the problem of deciding whether there are strict SPIs under improved
coordination at all, we move on to the question of what different perfect-
coordination SPIs there are. In particular, one might ask what the cost is of
only considering safe Pareto improvements relative to acting on a probabil-
ity distribution over Π(Γ) and the resulting expected utilities E [u(Π(Γ))].
We start with a lemma that directly provides a characterization. So far, all
the considered perfect-coordination SPIs (As , us , ue ) for a game (A, u) have
consisted in letting the representatives play a game (As , us ) that is isomor-
phic to the original game, but Pareto-improves (from the original players’
perspectives, i.e., ue ) at least one of the outcomes. It turns out that we can
restrict attention to this very simple type of SPI under improved coordina-
tion.

Lemma 13. Let Γ = ({a11 , ..., al11 }, ..., {a1n , ..., alnn }, u) be any game. Let Γ′
be a perfect-coordination SPI on Γ. Then we can define ue with values in

                                         33
C(Γ) such that under Assumption 2 the game
                   (︃
              Γ = Â1 := {â11 , ..., âl11 }, ..., Ân := {â1n , ..., âlnn },
               s

                                                                            )︃
                              i1         in            i1       in       e
                      û : (â1 , ..., ân ) ↦→ u(a1 , ..., an ), u

is also an SPI on Γ, with

                 E [u(Π(Γs )) | Π(Γ)=a] = E u(Π(Γ′ )) ⃓ Π(Γ)=a
                                           [︁         ⃓        ]︁


for all a ∈ A and consequently E [u(Π(Γs ))] = E [u(Π(Γ′ ))].

Proof. First note that (Â, û) is isomorphic to Γ. Thus by Assumption 2,
there is isomorphism Φ s.t. Γ ∼Φ (Â, û). WLOG assume that Φ simply
maps ai11 , ..., ainn ↦→ âi11 , ..., ânin . Then define ue as follows:
                                             [︂                                    ]︂
              ue (âi11 , ..., âinn ) = E u′ (Π(Γ′ )) | Π(Γ) = (ai11 , ..., ainn ) .

Here u′ describes the utilities that the original players assign to the outcomes
of Γ′ . Since u′ maps onto C(Γ) and C(Γ) is convex, ue as defined also
maps into C(Γ) as required. Note that for all ai11 , ..., ainn it is by assumption
u′ (Π(Γ′ )) ≥ u(ai11 , ..., ainn ) with certainty. Hence,
                                         [︂                              ]︂
             e i1           in              ′    ′           i1       in
            u (â1 , ..., ân )) = E u (Π(Γ )) | Π(Γ) = (a1 , ..., an )
                                  ≥ u(ai11 , ..., ainn ),

as required.

    Because of this result, we will focus on these particular types of SPIs,
which simply create an isomorphic game with different (Pareto-better) util-
ities. Note, however, that without assigning exact probabilities to the dis-
tributions of Π(Γ), Π(Γ′ ), the original players will in general not be able to
construct a Γs that satisfies the expected payoff equalities. For this rea-
son, one could still conceive of situations in which a different type of SPI
would be chosen by the original players and the original players are unable
to instead choose an SPI of the type described in Lemma 13.
    Lemma 13 directly implies a characterization of the expected utilities
that can be achieved with perfect-coordination SPIs. Of course, this charac-
terization depends on the exact distribution of Π(Γ). We omit the statement
of this result. However, we state the following implication.

                                               34
Corollary 14. Under Assumption 2, the set of Pareto improvements that
are safely achievable with perfect coordination

               {E[u(Γ′ )] | Γ′ is perfect-coordination SPI on Γ}

is a convex polygon.
    Because of this result, one can also efficiently optimize convex functions
over the set of perfect-coordination SPIs. Even without referring to the
distribution Π(Γ), many interesting questions can be answered efficiently.
For example, we can efficiently identify the perfect-coordination SPI that
maximizes the minimum improvements across players and outcomes a ∈ A.
    In the following, we aim to use Lemma 13 and Corollary 14 to give
maximally strong positive results about what Pareto improvements can be
safely achieved, without referring to exact probabilities over Π(Γ). To keep
things simple, we will do this only for the case of two players. To state our
results, we first need some notation: We use

          PF(C) := y ∈ C ⃓ ̸ ∃y′ ∈C, i ∈ {1, ..., n} : y′ ≥ y, yi′ > y
                     {︁      ⃓                                         }︁

to denote the Pareto frontier of a convex polygon C (or more generally
convex, closed set). For any real number x ∈ R, we use πi (x, C(Γ)) to denote
the y′ ∈ C(Γ) which maximizes y−i     ′ under the constraint y ′ = x. (Recall that
                                                              i
                                    ′
we consider 2-player games, so y−i is a single real number.) Note that such a
y′ exists if and only if x is i’s utility in some feasible payoff vector. We first
state our result formally. Afterwards, we will give a graphical explanation
of the result, which we believe is easier to understand.
Theorem 15. Make Assumption 2. Let Γ be a two-player game. Let y ∈ R2
be some potentially unsafe Pareto improvement on E [u(Π(Γ))]. For i = 1, 2,
     min/max
let xi       = min / max ui (supp(Π(Γ))). Then:
A) If there is some element in C(Γ) which Pareto-dominates all of
supp(Π(Γ)) and if y is Pareto-dominated by an element of at least one of
the following three sets:
   • L1     := the line         segment     between    π1 (xmin
                                                            1 , PF(C(Γ))      and
          max
     π1 (x1 , PF(C(Γ));

   • L2 := the segment of the curve PF(C(Γ)) between π1 (xmax
                                                          1   , PF(C(Γ))))
              max
     and π2 (x2 , PF(C(Γ))));

   • L3     := the line         segment     between    π2 (xmax
                                                            2   , PF(C(Γ))    and
          min
     π2 (x2 , PF(C(Γ)).

                                       35
Then there is an SPI under improved coordination Γs such that
E [u(Π(Γs ))] = y.
B) If there is no element in C(Γ) which Pareto-dominates all of supp(Π(Γ))
and if y is Pareto-dominated by an element each of L1 and L3 as defined
above, then there is a perfect-coordination SPI Γs such that E [u(Π(Γs ))] =
y.

     We now illustrate the result graphically. We start with Case A, which
is illustrated in Figure 2. The Pareto-frontier is the solid line in the north
and east. The points marked x indicate outcomes in supp(Π(Γ)). The point
marked by a filled circle indicates the expected value of the default equilib-
rium E [u(Π(Γ))]. The vertical dashed lines starting at the two extreme x
                                                     min/max
marks illustrate the application of π1 to project x1          onto the Pareto
frontier. The dotted line between these two points is L1 . Similarly, the
horizontal dashed lines starting at x marks illustrate the application of π2
               min/max
to project x2          onto the Pareto frontier. The line segment between
these two points is L3 . In this case, this line segments lies on the Pareto
frontier. The set L2 is simply that part of the Pareto frontier, which Pareto-
dominates all elements of supp(Π(Γ)), i.e., the part of the Pareto frontier to
the north-east between the two intersections with the northern horizontal
dashed line and eastern vertical dashed line. The theorem states that for
some y ∈ R2 to be a Pareto improvement, it must be in the gray area.
     Case B of Theorem 15 is depicted in Figure 3. Note that here the two
line segments L1 and L3 intersect. To ensure that a Pareto improvement is
safely achievable, the theorem requires that it is below both of these lines,
as indicated again by the gray area.
     For a full proof, see Appendix E. Roughly, Theorem 15 is proven by
re-mapping each of the outcomes of the original game as per Lemma 13.
For example, the projection of the default equilibrium E [u(Π(Γ))] (i.e., the
filled circle) onto L1 is obtained as an SPI by projecting all the outcomes
(i.e., all the x marks) onto L1 . In Case A, any utility vector y ∈ L2 that
Pareto-improves on all outcomes of the original game can be obtained by
re-mapping all outcomes onto y. Other kinds of y are handled similarly.
     As a corollary of Theorem 15, we can see that all (potentially unsafe)
Pareto improvements in the DM-RM subset game of the Demand Game of
Table 1 are equivalent to some perfect-coordination SPI. However, this is
not always the case:

Proposition 16. There is a game Γ = (A, u), representatives Π that satisfy
Assumptions 1 and 2, and an outcome a ∈ A s.t. ui (a) > E [ui (Π(Γ))] for


                                     36
       Player 2’s utility




                                     L1
                                                L2

         xmax
          2


E [u2 (Π(Γ)))]                                         L3

          xmin
           2
                                                            Player 1’s utility
                   xmin
                    1
                        E [u1 (Π(Γ)))] xmax
                                        1


          Figure 2: This figure illustrates Theorem 15, Case A.


      Player 2’s utility




        xmax
         2




                                           L1
E [u2 (Π(Γ))])
                                           L3



         xmin
          2
                                                                   Player 1’s utility
                      xmin
                       1
                           E [u1 (Π(Γ))]        xmax
                                                 1


          Figure 3: This figure illustrates Theorem 15, Case B.


                                    37
                                             Player 2
                                   a            b            c
                            a   −5, −5         4, 0      10, −100
                Player 1    b     0, 4         1, 1      10, −100
                            c   −100, 10     −100, 10       3, 3


Table 7: An example of a game in which – depending on Π – a Pareto
improvement may not be safely achievable.


all players i, but there is no perfect-coordination SPI (As , us , ue ) s.t. for all
players i, E [uei (Π(As , us ))] = ui (a).

    As an example of such a game, consider the game in Table 7. Strategy
c can be eliminated by strict dominance (Assumption 1) for both players,
leaving a typical Chicken-like payoff structure with two pure Nash equilibria
((a, b) and (b, a)), as well as a mixed Nash equilibrium (3/8 ∗ a + 5/8 ∗ b, 3/8 ∗
a + 5/8 ∗ b).
    Now let us say that in the resulting game P (Π(Γ)=(a, b)) = p =
P (Π(Γ)=(b, a)) for some p with 0 < p ≤ 1/2. Then one (unsafe) Pareto
improvement would be to simply always have the representatives play (c, c)
for a certain payoff of (3, 3). Unfortunately, there is no safe Pareto improve-
ment with the same expected payoff. Notice that (3, 3) is the unique element
of C(Γ) that maximizes the sum of the two players’ utilities. By linearity of
expectation and convexity of C(Γ), if for any Γs it is E [u(Π(Γs ))] = (3, 3), it
must be u(Π(Γs )) = (3, 3) with certainty. Unfortunately, in any safe Pareto
improvement the outcomes (a, b) and (b, a) must corresponds to outcomes
that still gives utilities of (4, 0) and (0, 4), respectively, because these are
Pareto-optimal within the set of feasible payoff vectors. We illustrate this
as an example of Case B of Theorem 15 in Figure 4.


6    The SPI selection problem
In the Demand Game, there happens to be a single non-trivial SPI. However,
in general (even without the type of coordination assumed in Section 5)
there may be multiple SPIs that result in different payoffs for the players.
For example, imagine an extension of the Demand Game imagine that both
players have an additional action DL′ , which is like DL, except that under
(DL′ , DL′ ), Aliceland can peacefully annex the desert. Aliceland prefers this


                                        38
         Player 2’s utility

                4

                3                           (c, c)




                1

                                                           Player 1’s utility
                          1             3         4

Figure 4: This figure illustrates the Game of Table 7 as an instance of
Theorem 15, Case B.


SPI over the original one, while Bobbesia has the opposite preference. In
other cases, it may be unclear to some or all of the players which of two SPIs
they prefer. For example, imagine a version of the Demand Game in which
one SPI mostly improves on (DM, DM) and another mostly improves on the
other three outcomes, then outcome probabilities are required for comparing
the two. If multiple SPIs are available, the original players would be left
with the difficult decision of which SPI to demand in their instruction.9
    This difficulty of choosing what SPI to demand cannot be denied. How-
ever, we would here like to emphasize that players can profit from the use of
SPIs even without addressing this SPI selection problem. To do so, a player
picks an instruction that is very compliant (“dove-ish”) w.r.t. what SPI is
chosen, e.g., one that simply goes with whatever SPI the other players de-
mand as long as that SPI cannot further be safely Pareto-improved upon.10
In many cases, all such SPIs benefit all players. For example, optimal SPIs
in bargaining scenarios like the Demand Game remove the conflict outcome,
which benefits all parties. Thus, a player can expect a safe improvement
even under such maximally compliant demands on the selected SPI.
    In some cases there may also be natural choices of demands (a là Schelling
[48, pp. 54–58] or focal points). If the underlying game is symmetric, a
   9
     A second question is what to instruct the representatives to do in case of differing
demands.
  10
     Of course, such an instruction would then also have to specify what happens if all
players submit such an instruction. This appears to be a lesser problem, however.



                                             39
symmetric safe Pareto improvement may be a natural choice. For example,
the fully reduced version of the Demand Game of Table 1 is symmetric.
Hence, we might expect that even if multiple SPIs were available, the original
players would choose a symmetric one.


7    Conclusion and future directions
Safe Pareto improvements are a promising new idea for delegating strategic
decision making. To conclude this paper, we discuss some ideas for further
research on SPIs.
    Straightforward technical questions arise in the context of the complex-
ity results of Section 4.6. First, what impact on the complexity does varying
the assumptions have? Our NP-completeness proof is easy to generalize at
least to some other types of assumptions. It would be interesting to give a
generic version of the result. We also wonder whether there are plausible
assumptions under which the complexity changes in interesting ways. Sec-
ond, one could ask how the complexity changes if we use more sophisticated
game representations (see the remarks at the end of that section). Third,
one could impose additional restrictions on the sought SPI. Fourth, we could
restrict the games under consideration. Are there games in which it becomes
easy to decide whether there is an SPI?
    It would also be interesting to see what real-world situations can already
be interpreted as utilizing SPIs, or could be Pareto-improved upon using
SPIs.


Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Award
IIS-1814056. Some early work on this topic was conducted by Caspar Oester-
held while working at the Foundational Research Institute (now the Center
on Long-Term Risk). For valuable comments and discussions, we are grate-
ful to Keerti Anand, Tobias Baumann, Jesse Clifton, Max Daniel, Lukas
Gloor, Adrian Hutter, Vojtěch Kovařı́k, Anni Leskelä, Brian Tomasik and
Johannes Treutlein, and our wonderful anonymous referees. We also thank
attendees of a 2017 talk at the Future of Humanity Institute at the Uni-
versity of Oxford, a talk at the May 2019 Effective Altruism Foundation
research retreat, and our talk at AAMAS 2021.




                                     40
References
 [1]   Krzysztof R. Apt. “Uniform Proofs of Order Independence for Various
       Strategy Elimination Procedures”. In: The B.E. Journal of Theoretical
       Economics 4.1 (2004), pp. 1–48. doi: 10.2202/1534-5971.1141.
 [2]   Robert J. Aumann. “Correlated Equilibrium as an Expression of
       Bayesian Rationality”. In: Econometrica 55.1 (Jan. 1987), pp. 1–18.
       doi: 10.2307/1911154.
 [3]   Robert J. Aumann. “Subjectivity and Correlation in Randomized
       Strategies”. In: Journal of Mathematical Economics 1.1 (Mar. 1974),
       pp. 67–97. doi: 10.1016/0304-4068(74)90037-8.
 [4]   Robert Axelrod. The Evolution of Cooperation. New York: Basic
       Books, 1984.
 [5]   Mihaly Barasz et al. Robust Cooperation in the Prisoner’s Dilemma:
       Program Equilibrium via Provability Logic. Jan. 2014. url: https :
       //arxiv.org/abs/1401.5577.
 [6]   Ken Binmore. Game Theory – A Very Short Introduction. Oxford Uni-
       versity Press, 2007.
 [7]   Tilman Börgers. “Pure Strategy Dominance”. In: Econometrica 61.2
       (Mar. 1993), pp. 423–430.
 [8]   Vitalik Buterin. Ethereum White Paper – A Next Generation Smart
       Contract & Decentralized Application Platform. Updated version avail-
       able at https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/White-Paper.
       2014. url: https : / / cryptorating . eu / whitepapers / Ethereum /
       Ethereum_white_paper.pdf.
 [9]   Andrew M. Colman. “Salience and focusing in pure coordination
       games”. In: Journal of Economic Methodology 4.1 (1997), pp. 61–81.
       doi: 10.1080/13501789700000004.
[10]   Vincent Conitzer and Tuomas Sandholm. “Complexity of (Iterated)
       Dominance”. In: Proceedings of the 6th ACM conference on Electronic
       commerce. Vancouver, Canada: Association for Computing Machinery,
       June 2005, pp. 88–97. doi: 10.1145/1064009.1064019.
[11]   Vincent Conitzer and Tuomas Sandholm. “Computing the Optimal
       Strategy to Commit to”. In: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on
       Electronic Commerce (EC). Ann Arbor, MI, USA: Association for
       Computing Machinery, 2006, pp. 82–90.


                                     41
[12]   Stephen A. Cook. “The complexity of theorem-proving procedures”.
       In: STOC ’71: Proceedings of the third annual ACM symposium on
       Theory of computing. New York: Association for Computing Machin-
       ery, May 1971, pp. 151–158. doi: 10.1145/800157.805047.
[13]   Andrew Critch. “A Parametric, Resource-Bounded Generalization
       of Löb’s Theorem, and a Robust Cooperation Criterion for Open-
       Source Game Theory”. In: Journal of Symbolic Logic 84.4 (Dec. 2019),
       pp. 1368–1381. doi: 10.1017/jsl.2017.42.
[14]   Matthias Ehrgott. Multicriteria Optimization. 2nd ed. Berlin:
       Springer, 2005.
[15]   Lance Fortnow. “Program equilibria and discounted computation
       time”. In: Proceedings of the 12th Conference on Theoretical Aspects
       of Rationality and Knowledge (TARK ’09). July 2009, pp. 128–133.
       doi: 10.1145/1562814.1562833.
[16]   Joaquim Gabarró, Alina Garcı́a, and Maria Serna. “The complexity
       of game isomorphism”. In: Theoretical Computer Science 412.48 (Nov.
       2011), pp. 6675–6695. doi: 10.1016/j.tcs.2011.07.022.
[17]   David Gale. “A Theory of N-Person Games with Perfect Information”.
       In: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
       States of America 39.6 (June 1953), pp. 496–501. doi: 10.1073/pnas.
       39.6.496.
[18]   David Gauthier. “Coordination”. In: Dialogue 14.2 (June 1975),
       pp. 195–221. doi: 10.1017/S0012217300043365.
[19]   Itzhak Gilboa, Ehud Kalai, and Eitan Zemel. “On the order of elim-
       inating dominated strategies”. In: Operations Research Letters 9.2
       (Mar. 1990), pp. 85–89. doi: 10.1016/0167-6377(90)90046-8.
[20]   John C. Harsanyi and Reinhard Selten. A General Theory of Equilib-
       rium Selection in Games. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1988.
[21]   Bengt Robert Holmström. “On Incentives and Control in Organiza-
       tions”. PhD thesis. Stanford University, Dec. 1977.
[22]   J. V. Howard. “Cooperation in the Prisoner’s Dilemma”. In: Theory
       and Decision 24 (May 1988), pp. 203–213. doi: 10.1007/BF00148954.
[23]   Leonid Hurwicz and Leonard Shapiro. In: The Bell Journal of Eco-
       nomics 9.1 (1978), pp. 180–191. doi: 10.2307/3003619.




                                     42
[24]   Adam Tauman Kalai et al. “A commitment folk theorem”. In: Games
       and Economic Behavior 69 (2010), pp. 127–137. doi: 10 . 1016 / j .
       geb.2009.09.008.
[25]   Jon Kleinberg and Robert Kleinberg. “Delegated Search Approximates
       Efficient Search”. In: Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Eco-
       nomics and Computation (EC). 2018.
[26]   Frank H. Knight. Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit. Boston, MA, USA:
       Houghton Mifflin Company, 1921.
[27]   Elon Kohlberg and Jean-Francois Mertens. “On the Strategic Stability
       of Equilibria”. In: Econometrica 54.5 (Sept. 1986), pp. 1003–1037. doi:
       10.2307/1912320.
[28]   Jean-Jacques Laffont and David Martimort. The Theory of Incentives
       – The Principal-Agent Model. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
       Press, 2002.
[29]   Richard A. Lambert. “Executive Effort and Selection of Risky
       Projects”. In: RAND J. Econ. 17.1 (1986), pp. 77–88.
[30]   David Lewis. Convention. Harvard University Press, 1969.
[31]   R. Duncan Luce and Howard Raiffa. Games and Decisions. Introduc-
       tion and Critical Survey. New York: Dover Publications, 1957.
[32]   Leslie M. Marx and Jeroen M. Swinkels. “Order Independence for
       Iterated Weak Dominance”. In: Games and Economic Behavior 18
       (1997), pp. 219–245. doi: 10.1006/game.1997.0525.
[33]   R. Preston McAfee. “Effective Computability in Economic Deci-
       sions”. May 1984. url: https : / / www . mcafee . cc / Papers / PDF /
       EffectiveComputability.pdf.
[34]   Dov Monderer and Moshe Tennenholtz. “Strong mediated equilib-
       rium”. In: Artificial Intelligence 173.1 (Jan. 2009), pp. 180–195. doi:
       10.1016/j.artint.2008.10.005.
[35]   John von Neumann. “Zur Theorie der Gesellschaftsspiele”. In: Math-
       ematische Annalen 100 (1928), pp. 295–320. doi: https://doi.org/
       10.1007/BF01448847.
[36]   Caspar Oesterheld. “Robust Program Equilibrium”. In: Theory and
       Decision 86.1 (Feb. 2019), pp. 143–159.
[37]   Caspar Oesterheld and Vincent Conitzer. “Minimum-regret contracts
       for principal-expert problems”. In: Proceedings of the 16th Conference
       on Web and Internet Economics (WINE). 2020.

                                      43
[38]   Hessel Oosterbeek, Randolph Sloof, and Gijs van de Kuilen. “Cultural
       Differences in Ultimatum Game Experiments: Evidence from a Meta-
       Analysis”. In: Experimental Economics 7 (June 2004), pp. 171–188.
       doi: 10.1023/B:EXEC.0000026978.14316.74.
[39]   Martin J. Osborne. An Introduction to Game Theory. New York: Ox-
       ford University Press, 2004.
[40]   Martin J. Osborne and Ariel Rubinstein. A Course in Game Theory.
       The MIT Press, 1994.
[41]   David G. Pearce. “Rationalizable Strategic Behavior and the Problem
       of Perfection”. In: Econometrica 54.4 (July 1984), pp. 1029–1050.
[42]   Guillaume Perez. “Decision diagrams: constraints and algorithms”.
       PhD thesis. Université Côte d’Azur, 2017. url: https : / / tel .
       archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-01677857/document.
[43]   Martin Peterson. An Introduction to Decision Theory. Cambridge Uni-
       versity Press, 2009.
[44]   Steven Pinker. How the Mind Works. W. W. Norton, 1997.
[45]   Werner Raub. “A General Game-Theoretic Model of Preference Adap-
       tions in Problematic Social Situations”. In: Rationality and Society 2.1
       (Jan. 1990), pp. 67–93.
[46]   Ariel Rubinstein. Modeling Bounded Rationality. Ed. by Karl Gunnar
       Persson. Zeuthen Lecture Book Series. The MIT Press, 1998.
[47]   Alexander Savelyev. “Contract law 2.0: ‘Smart’ contracts as the be-
       ginning of the end of classic contract law”. In: Information & Com-
       munications Technology Law 26.2 (2017), pp. 116–134. doi: 10.1080/
       13600834.2017.1301036.
[48]   Thomas C. Schelling. The Strategy of Conflict. Cambridge, MA: Har-
       vard University Press, 1960.
[49]   Thomas C. Schelling. “The Strategy of Conflict Prospectus for a Re-
       orientation of Game Theory”. In: The Journal of Conflict Resolution
       2.3 (Sept. 1958), pp. 203–264.
[50]   Alexander Schrijver. Theory of Linear and Integer Programming.
       Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, 1998.
[51]   Amartya Sen. “Choice, orderings and morality”. In: Practical Reason.
       Ed. by Stephan Körner. New Haven, CT, USA: Basil Blackwell, 1974.
       Chap. II, pp. 54–67.


                                      44
[52]   Heinrich von Stackelberg. “Marktform und Gleichgewicht”. In: Vi-
       enna: Springer, 1934, pp. 58–70.
[53]   Neal M. Stoughton. “Moral Hazard and the Portfolio Management
       Problem”. In: The Journal of Finance 48.5 (Dec. 1993), pp. 2009–
       2028. doi: 10.1111/j.1540-6261.1993.tb05140.x.
[54]   Robert Sugden. In: The Economic Journal 105.430 (May 1995),
       pp. 533–550. doi: 10.2307/2235016.
[55]   Moshe Tennenholtz. “Program equilibrium”. In: Games and Economic
       Behavior 49.2 (Nov. 2004), pp. 363–373.
[56]   Johannes Treutlein et al. “A New Formalism, Method and Open Is-
       sues for Zero-Shot Coordination”. In: Proceedings of the Thirty-eighth
       International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML’21). 2021.
[57]   Wiebe van der Hoek, Cees Witteveen, and Micheal Wooldridge. “Pro-
       gram equilibrium – a program reasoning approach”. In: International
       Journal of Game Theory 42 (3 Aug. 2013), pp. 639–671.
[58]   Luc N. van Wassenhove and Ludo F. Gelders. “Solving a bicriterion
       scheduling problem”. In: European Journal of Operational Research 4
       (1980), pp. 42–48.
[59]   Bernhard Von Stengel and Shmuel Zamir. Leadership with commit-
       ment to mixed strategies. Tech. rep. LSE-CDAM-2004-01. London
       School of Economics, 2004. url: http : / / www . cdam . lse . ac . uk /
       Reports/Files/cdam-2004-01.pdf.




                                      45
A     Proof of Theorem 1 – program equilibrium im-
      plementations of safe Pareto improvements
This paper considers the meta-game of delegation. SPIs are a proposed
way of playing these games. However, throughout most of this paper, we
do not analyze the meta-game directly as a game using the typical tools
of game theory. We here fill that gap and in particular prove Theorem 1,
which shows that SPIs are played in Nash equilibria of the meta game,
assuming sufficiently strong contracting abilities. As noted, this result is
essential. However, since it is mostly an application of existing ideas from
the literature on program equilibrium, we left a detailed treatment out of
the main text.
    A program game for Γ = (A, u) is defined via a set PROG = PROG1 ×
...×PROGn and a non-deterministic mapping exec : PROG1 ×...×PROGn ⇝
A. We obtain a new game with action sets PROG and utility function

                   U : PROG → Rn : c ↦→ E [u(exec(c))] .

    Though this definition is generic, one generally imagines in the program
equilibrium literature that for all i, PROGi consists of computer programs
in some programming language, such as Lisp, that take as input vectors in
PROG and return an action ai . The function exec on input c ∈ PROG then
executes each player i’s program ci on c to assign i an action. The definition
implicitly assumes that PROG only contains programs that halt when fed
one another as input (or that not halting is mapped onto some action). As is
usually done in the program equilibrium literature, we will leave unspecified
what constraints are used to ensure this. A program equilibrium is then
simply a Nash equilibrium of the program game.
    For the present paper, we add the following feature to the underlying
programming language. A program can call a “black box subroutine” Πi (Γ′ )
for any subset game Γ′ of Γ, where Πi (Γ′ ) is a random variable over A′i and
Π(Γ′ ) = (Π1 (Γ′ ), ..., Πn (Γ′ )).
    We need one more definition. For any game Γ and player i, we define
Player i’s threat point (a.k.a. minimax utility) viΓ as

                  viΓ =         min            max ui (σi , σ −i ).
                          σ −i ∈×j̸=i ∆(Aj ) σi ∈∆(Ai )


In words, viΓ is the minimum utility that the players other than i can force
onto i, under the assumption that i reacts optimally to their strategy. We
further will use minimax (i, j) ∈ ∆(Aj ) to denote the strategy for Player j

                                          46
that is played in the minimizer σ−i of the above. Of course, in general, there
might be multiple minimizers σ−i . In the following, we will assume that the
function minimax breaks such ties in some consistent way, such that for all
i,

     (minimax (i, j))j∈{1,...,n}−{i} ∈      arg min             max ui (σi , σ −i ).
                                         σ −i ∈×j̸=i ∆(Aj ) σi ∈∆(Ai )


   Note that for n = 2, each player’s threat point is computable in polyno-
mial time via linear programming; and that by the minimax theorem [35],
the threat point is equal to the maximin utility, i.e.,

                    viΓ =     max          min        ui (σi , σ−i ),
                            σi ∈∆(Ai ) σ−i ∈∆(A−i )


so viΓ is also the minimum utility that Player i can guarantee for herself
under the assumption that the opponent sees her mixed strategy and reacts
in order to minimize Player i’s utility.
    Tennenholtz’ [55] main result on program games is the following:

Theorem
      (︁ n 17 (Tennenholtz    2004 [55]). Let Γ = (A, u) be a game and let
x ∈ u ×i=1 ∆(Ai ) be a (feasible) payoff vector. If xi ≥ viΓ for i = 1, ..., n,
                    )︁

then x is the utility of some program equilibrium of a program game on Γ.

    Throughout the rest of this section, our goal is to use similar ideas as
Tennenholtz did for Theorem 17 to construct for any SPI Γs on Γ, a program
equilibrium that results in the play of Π(Γs ). As noted in the main text, the
Player i’s instruction to her representative to play the game Γs will usually be
conditional on the other player telling her representative to also play her part
of Γs and and vice versa. After all, if Player i simply tells her representative
to maximize usi from Asi regardless of Player −i’s instruction, then Player
−i will often be able to profit from deviating from the Γs instruction. For
example, in the safe Pareto improvement on the Demand Game, each player
would only want their representative to choose from {DL, RL} rather than
{DM, DM} if the other player’s representative does the same. It would then
seem that in a program equilibrium in which Π(Γs ) is played, each program
ci would have to contain a condition of the type, “if the opponent code plays
as in Π(Γs ) against me, I also play as I would in Π(Γs ).” But in a naive
implementation of this, each of the programs would have to call the other,
leading to an infinite recursion.
    In the literature on program equilibrium, various solutions to this prob-
lem have been discovered. We here use the general scheme proposed by

                                          47
Tennenholtz [55], because it is the simplest. We could similarly use the
variant proposed by Fortnow [15], techniques based on Löb’s theorem [5,
13], or ϵ-grounded mutual simulation [36] or even (meta) Assurance Game
preferences (see Appendix B).
    In our equilibrium, we let each player submit code as sketched in Algo-
rithm 2. Roughly, each player uses a program that says, “if everyone else
submitted the same source code as this one, then play Π(Γs ). Otherwise,
if there is a player j who submits a different source code, punish player j
by playing her minimax strategy”. Note that for convenience, Algorithm 2
receives the player number i as input. This way, every player can use the ex-
act same source code. Otherwise the original players would have to provide
slightly different programs and in line 2 of the algorithm, we would have
to use a more complicated comparison, roughly: “if cj ̸= ci are the same,
except for the player index used”.

 Algorithm 2: A program equilibrium implementation of an SPI
 Γs of Γ.
   Data: Everybody’s source code c, my index i
 1 for j ∈ {1, ..., n} − {i} do
 2    if cj ̸= ci then
 3        Play minimax (i, j);

 4 Play Πi (Γs );




Proposition 18. Let Γ be a game and let Γs be an SPI on Γ. Let c be the
program profile consisting only of Algorithm 2 for each player. Assume that
Π(Γ) guarantees each player at least threat point utility in expectation. Then
c is a program equilibrium and apply(c) = Π(Γs ).
Proof. By inspection of Algorithm 2, we see that exec(c) = Π(Γs ). It is
left to show that c is a Nash equilibrium. So let i be any player and c′i ∈
PROGi − {ci }. We need to show that E [ui (exec(c−i , c′i ))] ≤ E [ui (exec(c))].
Again, by inspection of c, exec(c−i , c′i ) is the threat point of Player i. Hence,

                  E ui (exec(c−i , c′i )) = vi
                    [︁                   ]︁

                                             ≤ E [ui (Π(Γ))]
                                             ≤ E [ui (Π(Γs ))]
                                             = E [ui (exec(c))]

as required.

                                        48
    Theorem 1 follows immediately.


B     A discussion of work by Sen (1974) and Raub
      (1990) on preference adaptation games
We here discuss Raub’s [45] paper in some detail, which in turn elaborates
on an idea by Sen [51]. Superficially, Raub’s setting seems somewhat similar
to ours, but we here argue that it should be thought of as closer to the work
on program equilibrium and bilateral precommitment.
    In Sections 1, 3 and 3.2, we briefly discuss multilateral commitment
games, which have been discussed before in various forms in the game-
theoretic literature. Our paper extends this setting by allowing instructions
that let the representatives play a game without specifying an algorithm
for solving that game. On first sight, it appears that Raub pursues a very
similar idea. Translated to our setting, Raub allows that as an instruction,
each player i chooses a new utility function usi : A → R, where A is the set
of outcomes of the original game Γ. Given instructions us1 , ..., usn , the repre-
sentatives then play the game (A, us ). In particular, each representative can
see what utility functions all the other representatives have been instructed
to maximize. However, what utility function representative i maximizes is
not conditional on any of the instructions by other players. In other words,
the instructions in Raub’s paper are raw utility functions without any sur-
rounding control structures, etc. Raub then asks for equilibria us of the
meta-game that Pareto-improve on the default outcome.
    To better understand how Raub’s approach relates to ours, we here give
an example of the kind of instructions Raub has in mind. (Raub uses the
same example in his paper.) As the underlying game Γ, we take the Pris-
oner’s Dilemma. Now the main idea of his paper is that the original players
can instruct their representatives to adopt so-called Assurance Game prefer-
ences. In the Prisoner’s Dilemma, this means that the representatives prefer
to cooperate if the other representative cooperates, and prefer to defect if
the other player defects. Further, they prefer mutual cooperation over mu-
tual defection. An example of such Assurance Game preferences is given
in Table 8. (Note that this payoff matrix resembles the classic Stag Hunt
studied in game theory.)
    The Assurance Game preferences have two important properties.

    1. If both players tell their representatives to adopt Assurance Game
       preferences, (Cooperate, Cooperate) is a Nash equilibrium. (Defect,


                                       49
                                             Player 2
                                     Cooperate       Defect
                       Cooperate        4, 4          1, 3
            Player 1
                        Defect          3, 1          2, 2


    Table 8: Assurance Game preferences for the Prisoner’s Dilemma


     Defect) is a Nash equilibrium as well. However, since (Cooperate,
     Cooperate) is Pareto-better than (Defect, Defect), the original play-
     ers could reasonably expect that the representatives play (Cooperate,
     Cooperate).

  2. Under reasonable assumptions about the rationality of the represen-
     tatives, it is a Nash equilibrium of the meta-game for both players to
     adopt Assurance Game preferences. If Player 1 tells her representa-
     tive to adopt Assurance Game preferences, then Player 2 maximizes
     his utility by telling his representative to also maximize Assurance
     Game preferences. After all, representative 1 prefers defecting if rep-
     resentative 2 defects. Hence, if Player 2 instructs his representative
     to adopt preferences that suggest defecting, then he should expect
     representative to defect as well.

    The first important difference between Raub’s approach and ours is re-
lated to item 2. We have ignored the issue of making SPIs Γs Nash equilibria
of our meta game. As we have explained in Section 3.2 and Appendix A,
we imagine that this is taken care of by additional bilateral commitment
mechanisms that are not the focus of this paper. For Raub’s paper, on the
other hand, ensuring mutual cooperation to be stable in the new game Γs
is arguably the key idea. Still, we could pursue the approach of the present
paper even when we limit assumptions to those that consist only of a utility
function.
    The second difference is even more important. Raub assumes that – as
in the PD – the default outcome of the game (Π(Γ) in the formalism of
this paper) is known. (Less significantly, he also assumes that it is known
how the representatives play under assurance game preferences.) Of course,
the key feature of the setting of this paper is that the underlying game Γ
might be difficult (through equilibrium selection problems) and thus that
the original players might be unable to predict Π(Γ).
    These are the reasons why we cite Raub in our section on bilateral com-


                                    50
mitment mechanisms. Arguably, Raub’s paper could be seen as very early
work on program equilibrium, except that he uses utility functions as a
programming language for representative. In this sense, Raub’s Assurance
Game preferences are analogous to the program equilibrium schemes of Ten-
nenholtz [55], Oesterheld [55], Barasz et al. [5] and van der Hoek, Witteveen,
and Wooldridge [57], ordered in increasing order of similarity of the main
idea of the scheme.


C     Proof of Lemma 4
Lemma 4. Let Φ and Ψ be isomorphisms between Γ and Γ′ . If Φ is (strictly)
Pareto-improving, then so is Ψ.

Proof. First, we argue that if Φ and Ψ are isomorphisms, then they are
isomorphisms relative to the same constants λ and c. For each player i, we
distinguish two cases. First the case where all outcomes a in Γ have the
same utility for Player i is trivial. Now imagine that the outcomes of Γ do
not all have the same utility. Then let ymin and ymax be the lowest and
highest utilities, respectively, in Γ. Further, let xmin and xmax be the lowest
and highest utilities, respectively, in Γ′ . It is easy to see that if Ψ is a game
isomorphism, it maps outcomes with utility ymin in Γ onto outcomes with
utility xmin in Γ′ , and outcomes with utility ymax in Γ onto outcomes with
utility xmax in Γ′ . Thus, if λΨ,i and cΨ,i are to be the constants for Ψ, then

                           ymin = λΨ,i xmin + cΨ,i
                          ymax = λΨ,i xmax + cΨ,i .

Since xmin ̸= xmax , this system of linear equations has a unique solution. By
the same pair of equations, the constants for Φ are uniquely determined.
   It follows that for all a ∈ A and i = 1, ..., n,

                         ui (a) = λi u′i (Ψ(a)) + ci
                                 = ui (Φ−1 (Ψ(a)))
                                 ≤ ui (Φ(Φ−1 (Ψ(a))))
                                 = ui (Ψ(a)).

Furthermore, if Φ is strictly Pareto-improving for some ã ∈ A, then by
bijectivity of Φ, Ψ, there is a ∈ A s.t. Φ−1 (Ψ(a)) = ã. For this a, the
inequality above is strict and therefore u(a) < u(Ψ(a)).


                                       51
  D     Proof of Theorem 9
  We here prove Theorem 9. We assume familiarity with basic ideas in com-
  putational complexity theory (non-deterministic polynomial time (NP), re-
  ductions, NP-completeness, etc.).

  D.1     On the structure of relevant outcome correspondence
          sequences
  Throughout our proof we will use a result about the structure of relevant
  outcome correspondences. Before proving this result, we give two lemmas.
  The first is a well-known lemma about elimination by strict dominance.

  Lemma 19 (path independence of iterated strict dominance). Let Γ be a
  game in which some strategy ai of player i is strictly dominated. Let Γ′ be
  a game we obtain from Γ by removing a strictly dominated strategy (of any
  player) other than ai . Then ai is strictly dominated in Γ′ .

     Note that this lemma does not by itself prove that iterated strict dom-
  inance is path dependence. However, path independence follows from the
  property shown by this lemma.

  Proof. Let a′i be the strategy that strictly dominates ai . We distinguish two
  cases:

Case 1: The strategy removed is a′i . Then there must be âi that strictly dom-
        inates a′i . Then it is for all a−i

                           ui (âi , a−i ) > ui (a′i , a−i ) > ui (ai , a−i ).

        Both inequalities are due to the definition of strict dominance. We
        conclude that âi must strictly dominate ai .

Case 2: The strategy removed is one other than ai or a′i . Since the set of
        strategies of the new game is a subset of the strategies of the old game
        it is still for each strategy a−i in the new game

                                    ui (a′i , a−i ) > ui (ai , a−i ),

        i.e., a′i still strictly dominates ai .




                                              52
    The next lemma shows that instead of first applying Assumption 1 plus
symmetry (Lemma 2.2) to add a strictly dominated action and then applying
Assumption 1 to eliminate a different strictly dominated strategy, we could
also first eliminate the strictly dominated strategy and then add the other
strictly dominated strategy.

Lemma 20. Let Γ ∼ Φred −1 Γ̂ by Assumption 1, where Γ is the reduced
                        (   )
game, and Γ̂ ∼Φ̃red Γ̃ by Assumption 1. Then either Γ = Γ̂ or there is a game
Γ′ s.t. Γ ∼Φ̃red Γ′ by Assumption 1 and Γ′ ∼ Φred −1 Γ̃ by Assumption 1.
                                            (    )

Proof. By the assumption both Γ̃ and Γ can be obtained from eliminating a
strictly dominated action from Γ̂. Let these actions be ã and a, respectively.
If ã = a, then Γ = Γ̃. So for the rest of this proof assume ã ̸= a. Let Γ′ be
the game we obtain by removing ã from Γ. We now show the two outcome
correspondences:

   • First we show that Γ ∼Φ̃red Γ′ , i.e., that ã is strictly dominated in Γ.
      For this notice that ã and a are both strictly dominated in Γ̂. Now
      Γ is obtained from Γ̂ by removing a. By Lemma 19, ã is still strictly
      dominated in Γ, as claimed.

   • Second we show that Γ′ ∼ Φred −1 Γ̃, i.e., that Γ̃ ∼Φred Γ′ , i.e., that
                                  (   )
     a is strictly dominated in Γ̃. Recall again that ã and a are both
     strictly dominated in Γ̂. Now Γ̃ is obtained from Γ̂ by removing a. By
     Lemma 19, a is still strictly dominated in Γ̃, as claimed.



   We are ready to state our lemma about the structure of outcome corre-
spondences.

Lemma 21. Let
                            Γ1 ∼Φ1 ... ∼Φk−1 Γk ,
where each outcome correspondence is due to a single application of Assump-
tion Assumption 1, Assumption 1 plus symmetry (Lemma 2.2) or Assump-
tion 2. Then there is a sequence Γ′1 , ..., Γ′m with Γ′1 = Γ1 and Γ′m = Γm ,
m ≤ k and l such that

                    Γ1 ∼Ψ1 Γ′2 ∼Ψ2 Γ′3 ∼Ψ3 ... ∼Ψl−1 Γ′l



                                      53
all by single applications of Assumption 1, Γ′l and Γ′l+1 are fully reduced
games such that Γ′l ∼Ψl Γ′l+1 by a single application of Assumption 2, and

              Γ′l+1 ∼ Ψl+1 −1 Γ′l+2 ∼ Ψ′l+2 −1 ... ∼(Ψ′m )−1 Γ′m
                     (    )          (     )

all by single applications of Assumption 1 with Lemma 2.2.

    A conciser way to state the consequence is that there must be games
Γred , Γs,red and Γs such that Γred is obtained from Γ by iterated elimination
of strictly dominated strategies, Γs,red is isomorphic to Γs,red , and Γs,red is
obtained from Γs by iterated elimination of strictly dominated strategies.

Proof. First divide the given sequence of outcome correspondences up into
periods that are maximally long while containing only correspondences by
Assumption 1 (with or without Lemma 2.2). That is, consider subsequences
of the form Γq ∼Φq ... ∼Φr−1 Γr such that:

   • Each of the correspondences Γq ∼Φq Γq+1 , ..., Γr−1 ∼Φr−1 Γr is by
     applying Assumption 1 with or without Lemma 2.2.

   • Either q = 1 or the correspondence Γq−1 ∼Φq−1 Γq is by Assumption 2.

   • Either r = k or the correspondence Γr ∼Φr Γr+1 is by Assumption 2.

In each such period apply Lemma 20 iteratively to either eliminate or move
to the right all inverted reduction elimination steps.
    In all but the first period, Γq contains no strictly dominated actions (by
stipulation of Assumption 2). Hence all but the first period cannot contain
any non-reversed elimination steps. Similarly, in all but the final period, Γr
contains no strictly dominated actions. Hence, in all but the final period,
there can be no reversed applications of Assumption 1.
    Overall, our new sequence of outcome correspondences thus has the fol-
lowing structure: first there is a sequence of elimination steps via Assump-
tion 1, then there is a sequence of isomorphism steps, and finally there is a
sequence of reverse elimination steps. We can summarize all the applications
of Assumption 2 into a single step applying that assumption to obtain the
claimed structure.

    Now notice that that the reverse elimination steps are only relevant for
deriving unilateral SPIs. Using the above concise formulation of the lemma,
we can always simply use Γs,red itself as an omnilateral SPI – it is not relevant
that there is some subset game Γs that reduces to Γs,red .


                                       54
Lemma 22. As in Lemma 21, let Γ1 ∼Φ1 ... ∼Φk−1 Γk , where each outcome
correspondence is due to a single application of Assumption Assumption 1,
Assumption 1 plus symmetry (Lemma 2.2) or Assumption 2. Let Γ2 , ..., Γk
all be subset games of Γ1 . Moreover, let Φk−1 ◦ ... ◦ Φ1 be Pareto improving.
Then there is a sequence of subset games Γ′2 , ..., Γ′m , Γ′m+1 such that Γ1 ∼Ψ1
Γ′2 ∼Ψ2 ... ∼Ψm−1 Γ′m all by applications of Assumption 1 (without applying
symmetry), and Γ′m ∼Ξ Γ′m+1 by application of Assumption 2 such that
Ξ ◦ Ψm−1 ... ◦ Ψ1 is Pareto improving.

Proof. First apply Lemma 21. Then notice that the correspondence func-
tions from applying Assumption 1 with symmetry have no effect on whether
the overall outcome correspondence is Pareto improving.

D.2     Non-deterministic polynomial-time algorithms for the
        SPI problem
D.2.1    The omnilateral SPI problem
We now show that the SPI problem is in NP at all. The following algo-
rithm can be used to determine whether there is a safe Pareto improve-
ment: Reduce the given game Γ until it can be reduced no further to obtain
some subset game Γ′ = (A′ , u). Then non-deterministically select injections
Φi : A′i → Ai . If Φ = (Φ1 , ..., Φn ) is (strictly) Pareto-improving (as required
in Theorem 3), return True with the solution Γs defined as follows: The set
of action profiles is defined as As = ×i Φi (A′i ). The utility functions are

            usi : As → R : as ↦→ (ui (Φ−1  s          −1 s
                                       1 (a1 ), ..., Φn (an )))i=1,...,n .

Otherwise, return False.

Proposition 23. The above algorithm runs in non-deterministic polynomial
time and returns True if and only if there is a (strict) unilateral SPI.

Proof. It is easy to see that this algorithm runs in non-deterministic polyno-
mial time. Furthermore, with Lemma 4 it is easy to see that if this algorithm
finds a solution Γs , that solution is indeed a safe Pareto improvement. It
is left to show that if there is a safe Pareto improvement via a sequence of
Assumption 2 and 1 outcome correspondences, then the algorithm indeed
finds a safe Pareto improvement.
     Let us say there is a sequence of outcome correspondences as per As-
sumptions 1 and 2 that show Γ ∼Φ Γs for Pareto-improving Φ. Then by
Lemma 22, there is Γ′ such that Γ ∼Ψred Γ′ via applying Assumption 1

                                         55
iteratively to obtain a fully reduced Γ′ and Γ′ ∼Ψiso Γs via a single applica-
tion of Assumption 2. By construction, our algorithm finds (guesses) this
Pareto-improving outcome correspondence.

    Overall, we have now shown that our non-deterministic polynomial-time
algorithm is correct and therefore that the SPI problem is in NP. Note
that the correctness of other algorithms can be proven using very similar
ideas. For example, instead of first reducing and then finding an isomor-
phism, one could first find an isomorphism, then reduce and then (only
after reducing) test whether the overall outcome correspondence function is
Pareto-improving. One advantage of reducing first is that there are fewer
isomorphisms to test if the game is smaller. In particular, the number of
possible isomorphisms is exponential in the number of strategies in the re-
duced game Γ′ but polynomial in everything else. Hence, by implementing
our algorithm deterministically, we obtain the following positive result.

Proposition 24. For games Γ with |A1 | + ... + |An | = m that can be reduced
(via iterative application of Assumption 1) to a game Γ′ with |A′1 | + ... +
|A′n | = l, the (strict) omnilateral SPI decision problem can be solved in
O(ml ).

D.2.2    The unilateral SPI problem
Next we show that the problem of finding unilateral SPIs is also in NP. Here
we need a slightly more complicated algorithm: We are given an n-player
game Γ and a player i. First reduce the game Γ fully to obtain some subset
game Γred . Then non-deterministically select injections Φi : Ared
                                                               i   → Ai . The
resulting candidate SPI game then is

                       Γs = ((A−i , Φi (Ared           s
                                         i )), (u−i , ui )),

where usi (as ) = ui (Φ−1  s          −1 s              s
                       1 (a1 ), ..., Φn (an )) for all a ∈ Φ(A
                                                               red ), and us (as )
                                                                           i
                  s
is arbitrary for a ∈       red
                     / Φ(A ). Return True if the following conditions are
satisfied:

   1. The correspondence function Φ must be (strictly) Pareto improving
      (as per the utility functions u).

   2. For each j ∈ {1, ..., n} − {i}, there are λj ∈ R+ and cj ∈ R such that
      for all a ∈ Ared , we have uj (a) = λj uj (Φ(a)) + cj .

   3. The game Γs reduces to the game (Φ(Ared ), (u−i , usi )).


                                        56
Otherwise, return False.

Proposition 25. The above algorithm runs in non-deterministic polynomial
time and returns True if and only if there is a (strict) unilateral SPI.

Proof. First we argue that the algorithm can indeed be implemented in
non-deterministic polynomial time. For this notice that for checking Item 2,
the constants can be found by solving n systems of linear equations of two
variables.
    It is left to prove correctness, i.e., that the algorithm returns True if and
only if there exists an SPI. We start by showing that if the algorithm returns
True, then there is an SPI. Specifically, we show that if the algorithm returns
True, the game Γs is indeed an SPI game. Notice that Γ ∼Ψ Γred for some
Ψ by iterative application of Assumption 1 with Transitivity (Lemma 2.2);
that Γred ∼Φ (Φ(Ared ), (u−i , usi )) by application of Assumption 2. Finally,
(Φ(Ared ), (u−i , usi )) ∼Ξ−1 Γs for some Ξ by iterative application of Assump-
tion 1 to Γs , plus transitivity (Lemma 2.3) with reversal (Lemma 2.2).
    It is left to show that if there is an SPI, then the above algorithm will
find it and return true. To see this, notice that Lemma 21 implies that there
is a sequence of outcome correspondences Γ ∼Ψ Γred ∼Φ Γs,red ∼Ξ Γs . We
can assume that Γs,red and Γs have the same action sets for Player i. It
is easy to see that in Γs we could modify the utilities usi (a) for any a that
is not in Γs,red , because Player i’s utilities do not affect the elimination of
strictly dominated strategies from Γs .

Proposition 26. For games Γ with |A1 | + ... + |An | = m that can be reduced
(via iterative application of Assumption 1) to a game Γ′ with |A′1 | + ... +
|A′n | = l, the (strict) unilateral SPI decision problem can be solved in O(ml ).

D.3    The SPI problems are NP-hard
We now proceed to showing that the safe Pareto improvement problem is
NP-hard. We will do this by reducing the subgraph isomorphism problem
to the (two-player) safe Pareto improvement problem. We start by briefly
describing one version of that problem here.
    A (simple, directed) graph is a tuple (n, a : {1, ..., n} × {1, ..., n} → B),
where n ∈ N and B := {0, 1}. We call a the adjacency function of the graph.
Since the graph is supposed to be simple and therefore free of self-loops
(edges from one vertex to itself), we take the values a(j, j) for j ∈ {1, ..., n}
to be meaningless.



                                       57
   For given graphs G = (n, a),G′ = (n′ , a′ ) a subgraph isomorphism from
G to G′ is an injection ϕ : {1, ..., n} → {1, ...n′ } such that for all j ̸= l
                            a(j, l) ≤ a′ (ϕ(j), ϕ(l)).
In words, a subgraph isomorphism from G to G′ identifies for each node in
G a node in G′ s.t. if there is an edge from node j to node l in G, there
must also be an edge in the same direction between the corresponding nodes
ϕ(j), ϕ(l) in G′ . Another way to say this is that we can remove some set of
(n′ − n) nodes and some edges from G′ to get a graph that is just a relabeled
(isomorphic) version of G.
Definition 8. Given two graphs G, G′ , the subgraph isomorphism prob-
lem consists in deciding whether there is a subgraph isomorphism ϕ between
G, G′ .
   The following result is well-known.
Lemma 27 ([12, Theorem 2]). The subgraph isomorphism problem is NP-
complete.
Lemma 28. The subgraph isomorphism problem is reducible in linear time
with linear increase in problem instance size to the (strict) (unilateral) safe
Pareto improvement problem for two players. As a consequence, the (strict)
(unilateral) safe Pareto improvement problem is NP-hard.
Proof. Let G = (n, a) and Ĝ = (n̂, â) be graphs. Without loss of generality
assume both graphs have at least 2 vertices, i.e., that n, n̂ ≥ 2. For this
proof, we define [i] := {1, ..., i} for any i ∈ N.
     We first define two games, one for each graph, and then a third game
that contains the two.
     The game for G is the game Γ as in Table 9. Formally, let ϵ < 1/2n. Then
we let Γ = (A1 , A2 , u1 , u2 ), where A1 = A2 = [2n + 2]. The utility functions
are defined via
                                 if i = j and i, j ∈ [n]
             ⎧
             ⎪      2,
                                 if i ̸= j and i, j ∈ [n]
             ⎪
             ⎪
             ⎪
             ⎪
             ⎪    a(i, j),
             ⎪
             ⎪
             ⎪
             ⎪     −1,           if i ∈ {n + 1, ..., 2n}, j ∈ [n] and i ̸= j + n
             ⎪
             ⎪
             ⎪
             ⎪     −1,           if i ∈ [n], j ∈ {n + 1, ..., 2n} and i + n ̸= j
               4 + (n + i)ϵ if i ∈ [n] and j = i + n
             ⎨
 u1 (i, j) =
             ⎪
             ⎪    4 + jϵ         if j ∈ [n] and i = j + n
                    −1           if i, j ∈ {n + 1, ..., 2n}
             ⎪
             ⎪
             ⎪
             ⎪
                     3           if i ∈ {2n + 1, 2n + 2} and j ∈ [2n]
             ⎪
             ⎪
             ⎪
             ⎪
             ⎪
             ⎪
             ⎪
             ⎪       6           if i = j = 2n + 1
             ⎩
                     ϵ           if j ∈ {2n + 1, 2n + 2} and not i = j = 2n + 1

                                       58
              1      ...          n           n+1            ...       2n        2n+1    2n+2
      1      2, 2                a, 1       4+nϵ + ϵ, 4               −1, −1      0, 3    0, 3
      ..             ..                                      ..                    ..      ..
       .                  .                                       .                 .       .
   n         a, 1                2, 2         −1, −1                  4+2nϵ, 4   0, 3    0, 3
  n+1       4+ϵ, 4              −1, −1                                           0, 3    0, 3
   ..                ..                                                           ..      ..
    .                     .                                −1, −1                  .       .
   2n       −1, −1             4+nϵ, 4                                           0, 3    0, 3
 2n + 1      3, 0    ...         3, 0           3, 0         ...        3, 0     6, ϵ    ϵ, ϵ
 2n + 2      3, 0    ...         3, 0           3, 0         ...        3, 0     ϵ, ϵ    ϵ, 6

   Table 9: The game Γ constructed to represent the graph G = (n, a).

                                        {D} × [2n + 2]    {P } × [2n̂ + 2]
              {R} × [2n̂ + 2]              −2, −1                Γ̂
              {T } × [2n + 2]                Γ                10, −10

            Table 10: The game Γc as constructed from Γ and Γ̂.


and
                              if i = j and i, j ∈ [n]
                  ⎧
                  ⎪  2,
                              if i ̸= j and i, j ∈ [n]
                  ⎪
                  ⎪
                  ⎪
                  ⎪
                  ⎪  1,
                  ⎪
                  ⎪
                  ⎪
                  ⎪ −1,       if i ∈ {n + 1, ..., 2n}, j ∈ [n] and i ̸= j + n
                  ⎪
                  ⎪
                  ⎪
                  ⎪ −1,       if i ∈ [n], j ∈ {n + 1, ..., 2n} and i + n ̸= j
                     4        if i ∈ [n] and j = i + n
                  ⎨
      u2 (i, j) =                                                             .
                  ⎪
                  ⎪  4        if j ∈ [n] and i = j + n
                    −1        if i, j ∈ {n + 1, ..., 2n}
                  ⎪
                  ⎪
                  ⎪
                  ⎪
                     3        if j ∈ {2n + 1, 2n + 2} and i ∈ [2n]
                  ⎪
                  ⎪
                  ⎪
                  ⎪
                  ⎪
                  ⎪
                  ⎪
                  ⎪  6        if i = j = 2n + 2
                  ⎩
                     ϵ        if i ∈ {2n + 1, 2n + 2} and not i = j = 2n + 2

We define Γ̂ based on Ĝ analogously, except that in Player 1’s utilities we
use 5 instead of 4, 5 + (n + i)ϵ instead of 4 + (n + i)ϵ, 5 + jϵ instead of 4 + jϵ
and 4 instead of 3.
    We now define Γc = (Ac , uc ) from Γ and Γ̂ as sketched in Table 10. For
the following let

                 AΓ = ({T } × [2n + 2]) × ({D} × [2n + 2])
                 AΓ̂ = ({R} × [2n̂ + 2]) × ({P } × [2n̂ + 2]),


                                             59
and Ac1 = AΓ1 ∪AΓ̂1 and Ac2 = AΓ2 ∪AΓ̂2 . For i, j ∈ [2n+2], let uc ((T, i), (D, j))
be the utility of (i, j) in Γ. For i, j ∈ [2n̂ + 2] let uc ((R, i), (P, j)) be the
utility of (i, j) in Γ̂. Finally, define uc ((R, i), (D, j)) = (−2, −1) for all
i ∈ [2n̂ + 2] and all j ∈ [2n + 2]; and uc ((T, i), (P, j)) = (10, −10) for all
i ∈ [2n + 2] and all j ∈ [2n̂ + 2].
    It is easy to show that this reduction can be computed in linear time
and that it also increases the problem instance size only linearly.
    To prove our claim, we need to prove the following two propositions:
   1. If there is a subgraph isomorphism from G to Ĝ, then there is a uni-
       lateral, strict SPI.
   2. If there is any SPI, then there is a subgraph isomorphism from G to
       Ĝ.

1. We start with the first claim. Assume there is a subgraph isomorphism ϕ
from G to G′ . We construct our SPI as usual: first we reduce the game Γc by
iterated elimination of strictly dominated strategies, then we find a Pareto-
improving outcome equivalence between the reduced game and some subset
game Γs,red of Γc . Finally, we show that Γs,red arises from removing strictly
dominated strategies from subset game Γs of Γc . It is easy to see that the
game resulting from iterated elimination of strictly dominated strategies is
just the Γ part of it. Abusing notation a little, we will in the following just
call this Γ (even though it has somewhat differently named action sets).
    Next we define a pair of functions Ψ1/2 , which will later form our iso-
morphism. For all i ∈ [n] and b ∈ {1, 2}, we define Ψ1 via

                              Ψ1 (T, i) = (R, ϕ(i))
                         Ψ1 (T, n + i) = (R, n̂ + ϕ(i))
                        Ψ1 (T, 2n + b) = (R, 2n̂ + b)

Define Ψ2 (D, i) = (P, ϕ(i)) and so on analogously.
    Now define Γs,red to be the subset game with action sets Ψ1 (A1 ) and
Ψ2 (A2 ), where A1 and A2 are the action sets of Γ; and with utility functions

                us1 : Ψ1 (A1 ) × Ψ2 (A2 ) → R : as ↦→ uc1 (Ψ−1 (as ))

and uc2 (as restricted to Ψ1 (A1 ) × Ψ2 (A2 )).
    We must now show that Ψ is a game isomorphism between Γ and Γs,red .
First, it is easy to see that for i = 1, 2, Ψi is a bijection between Ai and
Ψi (Ai ). Moreover,

                     us1 (Ψ(a)) = uc1 (Ψ−1 (Ψ(a))) = uc1 (a).

                                         60
For player 2, we need to distinguish the different cases of actions. Since each
case is trivial from looking at the definition of Γ and Γ̂ we omit the detailed
proof.
     Next we need to show that Ψ is strictly Pareto-improving as judged by
the original players’ utility function uc . Again, this is done by distinguishing
a large number of cases of action profiles a, all of which are trivial on their
own. The most interesting one is that of ((T, i), (D, j)) for i, j ∈ [n] with
i ̸= j because this is where we use the fact that ϕ is a subgraph isomorphism:
               uc1 (Ψ((T, i), (D, j))) = uc1 ((R, ϕ(i)), (P, ϕ(j)))
                                         = â(ϕ(i), ϕ(j))
                                         ≥ a(i, j)
                                         = uc1 ((T, i), (D, j)).
We omit the other cases.
    It is left to construct a unilateral subset game Γs of Γc such that Γs
reduces to Γs,red via iterated elimination of strictly dominated strategies.
Let Γs = (Ψ1 (A1 ), Ac2 , us1 , uc2 ), where we set us1 (a1 , a2 ) arbitrarily for a2 ∈
Ac2 − Ψ2 (A2 ).
    We now show that Γs reduces to Γs,red via repeated application of As-
sumption 1. So let a2 ∈ Ac2 − Ψ2 (A2 ). We distinguish the following cases:
   • If a2 ∈ D × [2n + 2], then a2 is strictly dominated by (P, 2n̂ + 1) and
     by (P, 2n̂ + 2).
   • If a2 = (P, i) for some i ∈ {1, ..., n̂}, then by assumption that a2 ∈
     Ac2 −Ψ(A2 ) and by construction of Ψ, we know that (R, n+i) ∈/ Ψ1 (A1 ).
     From this and inspecting Table 9 we see that (P, 2n̂+1) and (P, 2n̂+2)
     strictly dominate (P, i).
   • If a2 = (P, n̂ + i) for some i ∈ {1, ..., n̂}, then by assumption that a2 ∈
     Ac2 − Ψ2 (A2 ) and by construction of Ψ, we know that (R, i) ∈   / Ψ1 (A1 ).
     From this and inspecting Table 9 we see that (P, 2n̂+1) and (P, 2n̂+2)
     strictly dominate (P, n̂ + i).
Note that (P, 2n̂ + 1) and (P, 2n̂ + 2) are both in Ψ2 (A2 ) by construction of
Ψ.
    2. It is left to show that if there is any kind of non-trivial SPI, there is
also a subgraph isomorphism from G to Ĝ.
    By Lemma 21, if there is an SPI, there are bijections Ψ1 , Ψ2 that are
jointly Pareto-improving from the reduced game Γ to Γc . From these func-
tions we will construct a subgame isomorphism. However, to do so (and to

                                          61
see that the resulting function is indeed a subgraph isomorphism), we need
to first make a few simple observations about the structure of Ψ1 and Ψ2 .
Define AΓ,[n] = ({T }×[n])×({D}×[n]) and AΓ̂,[n̂] = ({R}×[n̂])×({P }×[n̂]).

 (a) First we will argue that there is an action a ∈ AΓ of the reduced game
     s.t. Ψ(a) ∈ AΓ̂ . We prove this by showing the following contrapositive:
     if Ψ(AΓ ) and AΓ̂ are disjoint, then Ψ must, contrary to assumption,
     be trivial, i.e., Ψ must be the pair of identity functions on AΓ .
     From the fact that Ψ is Pareto improving, it follows that Ψ((T, 2n +
     1), (D, 2n + 1)) = ((T, 2n + 1), (D, 2n + 1)), since outside of AΓ̂ there is
     no outcome with utility at least 6 for Player 1. Similarly, Ψ((T, 2n +
     2), (D, 2n + 2)) = ((T, 2n + 2), (D, 2n + 2)). It then follows that
     Ψ((T, n), (D, 2n)) = ((T, n), (D, 2n)), since apart from the outcomes
     we have already mapped to, no other outcome gives Player 1 a util-
     ity of 4 + 2nϵ. Next it follows that Ψ((T, n − 1), (D, 2n − 1)) =
     ((T, n−1), (D, 2n−1)), again because all outcomes with utility at least
     4 + (2n − 1)ϵ for Player 1 outside of AΓ̂ are already mapped to. And so
     on, until we obtain that Ψ((T, 1), (D, n + 1)) = ((T, 1), (D, n + 1)). By
     an analogous line of argument we can show that Ψ((T, 2n), (D, n)) =
     ((T, 2n), (D, n)), ..., Ψ((T, n + 1), (D, 1)) = ((T, n + 1), (D, 1)). To-
     gether these equalities uniquely specify Ψ1 = id and Ψ2 = id.

 (b) We next argue that Ψ(AΓ ) ⊆ AΓ̂ . We show a contrapositive, specif-
     ically that if this were not the case then Ψ would not be Pareto-
     improving. So assume that Ψ(AΓ ) ̸⊆ AΓ̂ . Then from item a it follows
     that there is a ∈ AΓ such that neither Ψ(a) ∈ AΓ̂ nor Ψ(a) ∈ AΓ . Then
     either uc1 (Ψ(a)) = −2 and hence uc1 (a) > uc1 (Ψ(a)) or u2 (Ψ(a)) = −10
     and hence uc2 (a) < uc2 (Ψ(a)).

 (c) We now argue that for Ψ to be Pareto-improving, Ψ(AΓ,[n] ) must be a
     subset of AΓ̂,[n̂] . To show this, notice first that Ψ((T, 2n + i), (D, 2n +
     j)) = ((R, 2n̂+i), (P, 2n̂+j)) for all i, j ∈ {1, 2} by a similar argument
     as used repeatedly in Item a. Hence, Ψ(AΓ,[n] ) ⊆ AΓ̂,[2n] . Now assume
     for contraposition that there is i ∈ [n] such that WLOG Ψ1 (T, i) =
     (R, j) for some j ∈ {n̂ + 1, ..., 2n̂}. Then for all but one opponent
     move (D, l) with l ∈ [2n], uc1 (Ψ((T, i), (D, l))) = −1. But since n ≥ 2,
     there are at least two opponent moves (D, l) with l ∈ [2n] such that
     uc1 ((T, i), (D, l)) ≥ 0. Hence, Ψ cannot be Pareto-improving.



                                      62
 (d) Finally, notice that for i ∈ [n] and j ∈ [n̂], if Ψ1 (T, i) = (R, j), then
     also Ψ2 (D, i) = (P, j). To see this, assume it was Ψ2 (R, i) = (P, l) for
     some l ̸= j. Then by Item c, l ∈ [n]. Hence,

       uc2 ((T, i), (R, i)) = 2 > 1 = uc2 ((R, j), (P, l)) = uc2 (Ψ1 (T, i), Ψ2 (R, i))

      in contradiction to the assumption that Ψ is Pareto improving.

    We are ready to construct our subgraph isomorphism. For i ∈ [n], define
ϕ(i) to be the second element of the pair Ψ1 (T, i). By Item d, ϕ(i) can
equivalently be defined as the second item in the pair Ψ2 (D, i). By Item
c, ϕ is a function from [n] to [n̂]. By assumption about Ψ, ϕ is injective.
Further, by construction of Γc and ϕ, as well as the assumption that Ψ is
Pareto improving, we infer that for all i, j ∈ [n] with i ̸= j,

                   â(ϕ(a), ϕ(j)) = uc1 ((R, ϕ(i)), (P, ϕ(j)))
                                    = uc1 (Ψ1 (T, i), Ψ2 (D, j))
                                    ≥ uc1 ((T, i), (D, j))
                                    = a(i, j).

We conclude that ϕ is a subgraph isomorphism.


E    Proof of Theorem 15
Proof. We will give the proof based on the graphs as well, without giving
all formal details. Further we assume in the following that neither L1 nor
L3 consist of just a single point, since these cases are easy.
    Case A: Note first that by Corollary 14 it is enough to show that if y is
in any of the listed sets L1 , L2 , L3 , it can be made safe.
    It’s easy to see that all payoff vectors on the curve segment of the Pareto
frontier L2 are safely achievable. After all, all payoff vectors in this set
Pareto-improve on all outcomes in supp(Π(Γ)). Hence, for each y on the
line segment, one could select the Γs where ue = y.
    It is left to show that all elements of L1/2 are safely achievable. Remem-
ber that not all payoff vectors on the line segments are Pareto improvements,
only those that are to the north-east of (Pareto-better than) the default util-
ity. In the following, we will use L′1 and L′3 to denote those elements of L1
and L3 , respectively, that are Pareto-improvements on the default.
    We now argue that the Pareto improvement y on the line L1 for which
y1 = E [u1 (Π(Γ))] is safely achievable. In other words, y is the projection

                                          63
northward of the default utility, or y = π1 (E [u(Π(Γ))] , L1 ). This y is
also one of the endpoints of L′1 . To achieve this utility, we construct the
equivalent game as per Lemma 13, where the utility to the original players
of each outcome (â1 , â2 ) of the new game Γs is similarly the projection
northward onto L1 of the utility of the corresponding outcome (a1 , a2 ) in
Γs . That is,
                        ue (â1 , â2 ) = π1 (u(a1 , a2 ), L1 ).
Note that because C(Γ) is convex and the endpoints of the line segment L1
are by definition in C(Γ), it is L1 ⊆ C(Γ). Hence, all values of ue thus defined
are feasible. Because all outcomes in the original game lie below the line L1 ,
π1 is linear. Hence,

                    E [ue (Π(Γs ))] = E [π1 (u(Π(Γ)), L1 )]
                                      = π1 (E [u(Π(Γ))] , L1 )

as required.
    We have now shown that one of the endpoints of L′1 is safely achievable.
Since the other endpoint of L′1 is in L2 , it is also safely achievable. By
Corollary 14, this implies that all of L′1 is safely achievable.
    By an analogous line of reasoning, we can also show that all elements of
L′3 are safely achievable.


      Case B: Define L′1 , L′3 as before as those elements of L1 , L3 respectively
that Pareto improve on the default E [u(Π(Γ))]. By a similar argument as
before, one can show that the utilities πi (E [u(Π(Γ))] , L′j ) is safely achievable
both for i = 1, j = 1 and for i = 2, j = 3. Call these points E1 and E3 ,
respectively.
      We now proceed in two steps. First, we will show that there is a third
safely achievable utility point E2 , which is above both L1 and L3 . Then we
will show the claim using that point.
      To construct E2 , we again construct an SPI Γs as per Lemma 13. For
each (a1 , a2 ) ∈ A1 × A2 we will set the utility ue (â1 , â2 ) of the corresponding
(â1 , â2 ) ∈ Â1 × Â2 to be above or on both L1 and L3 , i.e., on or above a set
which we will refer to as max(L1 , L3 ). Formally, max(L1 , L3 ) is the set of
outcomes in L1 ∪ L3 that are not strictly Pareto dominated by some other
element of L′1 ∪ L′3 . Note that by definition every outcome in supp(Π(Γ))
is Pareto-dominated by some outcome in either L1 or L3 . Hence, by tran-
sitivity of Pareto dominance, each outcome is Pareto-dominated by some
outcome in max(L1 , L3 ). Hence, the described ue is indeed feasible.

                                         64
    Now note that the set of feasible payoffs of Γ is convex. Further, the
curve max(L1 , L3 ) is concave. Because the area above a concave curve is
convex and because the intersection of convex sets is convex, the set of
feasible payoffs on or above max(L1 , L3 ) is also convex. By definition of
convexity, E2 = E [ue (Π(Γs ))] is therefore also in the set of feasible payoffs
on or above max(L1 , L3 ) and therefore above both L1 and L3 as desired.
    In our second step, we now use E1 , E2 , E3 to prove the claim. Because of
convexity of the set of safely achievable payoff vectors as per Corollary 14,
all utilities below the curve consisting of the line segments from E1 to E2
and from E2 to E3 are safely achievable. The line that goes through E1 , E2
intersects the line that contains L1 at E1 , by definition. Since non-parallel
lines intersect each other exactly once and parallel lines that intersect each
other are equal and because E2 is above or on L1 , the line segment from
E1 to E2 lies entirely on or above L1 . Similarly, it can be shown that the
line segment from E2 to E3 lies entirely on or above L3 . It follows that
the E1 − E2 − E3 curve lies entirely above or on min(L1 , L3 ). Now take
any Pareto improvement that lies below both L′1 and L′3 . Then this Pareto
improvement lies below min(L′1 , L′3 ) and therefore below the E1 − E2 − E3
curve. Hence, it is safely achievable.




                                      65
